YAGS

Generic character design rules for YAGS, which allows characters to be
built for a wide variety of settings, times and genres. Includes lists
of skills and advantages available to characters in realistic settings.

Samuel Penn

sam@notasnark.net

\$Revision: 0.7.8 \$

\$Date: 2012-03-19 17:01:18 \$

2013

Samuel Penn

This document can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of
the GNU Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation
version 2.

# Yet Another Game System?

YAGS is a tabletop roleplaying game designed for playing games in a wide
variety of different genres, including fantasy, horror, modern and
science fiction. Instead of presenting a single rulebook that tries to
cater for all types of games, it is designed to be flexible and modular,
using a core set of rules with pluggable components.

For the full set of available rules, see the main YAGS website at
https://yags-rpg.net/ where everything is free to download.

What you are reading now is Characters, which provides the default
character generation rules for modern settings. Within these pages, you
will find guidelines for designing any character from the early 1900s up
to the early 21st century.

Characters provides everything players need to generate characters,
including an explanation of the basic rules and a generic framework for
groups to use in their own campaigns, whether they are playing a combat
heavy special forces campaign, modern horror, a Cold War era spy game or
1920s adventure fiction.

So what sort of games is YAGS?

YAGS is Free, and released under the GNU Public License. You can
download it, print it, modify it and even publish your own versions, as
long as they use the same license.

YAGS is a generic system that is designed to be flexible and extensible.
The default setting is the real world, so any campaign similar to the
real world should fit well.

YAGS aims for Cinematic Realism. Heroes need to be clever to avoid a
short life expectancy. Getting shot is just as likely to kill them as
anyone else, they just need to make sure that they shoot first.

YAGS tries for a simple and consistent set of rules, but not too simple.
Rules can add flavour to a game, and give players more options on how to
describe and play their characters.

In YAGS, it is expected that characters can get hurt, or even die. It is
not assumed that they will succeed just because they are the good guys,
or because they are doing the heroic thing. Of course, it can be run any
way the GM sees fit, but gritty fiction is the way in which it has been
designed.

I\'ve got a little itch, down there. Would you mind?

It is up to the Game Master to decide on the type of campaign that will
be played by selecting one of four starting character levels: Mundane,
Skilled, Exceptional or Heroic. These determine the number of points a
player has to build their character and the maximum levels they can
start with on their attributes and skills.

This choice does not limit how powerful and/or skilled characters can
become over time, they merely represent how good characters are at the
start of the game.

:::: note
::: title
:::

The core rules of YAGS try to portray a model of the world that gives
results that are similar to what we might expect in the real world,
allowing players and GMs to second guess the results of actions based on
their own common sense. This does mean that getting shot is bad, and
being outnumbered in a melee is not a good thing. Most characters will
be forced into being very careful if they are going up against organised
enemies.

However, highly skilled characters can sidestep some of these
difficulties, and act more like Hollywood action heroes - awesome, but
not completely super human. You can\'t dodge a bullet, but you might be
able to dodge the gun.
::::

YAGS aims for something close to realism, whilst still allowing for
heroic characters. Even the greatest hero can be taken out by a single
bullet or thrust of a sword, but they win against the enemy hordes
through clever tactics, high skill and possibly some luck.

## The Rules in Brief

YAGS uses a single d20 for all die rolls. When making a skill check, you
determine which attribute and skill to use, and roll Attribute x Skill +
1d20. Most professionals will have an attribute of 3 and a skill of 4,
so will be rolling 12 + 1d20.

A very easy task has a target difficulty of 10, a moderate task 20, a
difficult task 30+. You must roll the target difficulty or higher in
order to succeed, and the more you roll above the target, the better
your success. In some circumstances, difficulties can get as high as 100
or more, though this will be unusual.

In some cases you may need to make a check just against an attribute by
itself (for example, a Health check to remain conscious) where no skill
is involved. In this case, you roll Attribute x 4 + 1d20.

### Attributes

There are eight primary attributes that all characters have, and these
define your raw talent. Raising attributes after character generation
may be difficult or impossible, depending on the campaign, and though a
high attribute won\'t make you automatically good, it is necessary in
order to be very good.

The attributes are Strength, Health, Agility, Dexterity, Perception,
Intelligence, Empathy and Will.

### Skills

Skills are abilities which are gained through study, experience and
training. There are 8 basic skills (talents) which all being at a score
of 2, all other skills are assumed to start at zero unless stated
otherwise for your background.

A skill of 4 is considered to be a trained professional, 6 is an expert,
8 is elite and 12+ is a true master of the profession. Skills above 15
are pretty much unheard of, though there is no theoretical limit to how
high skills can go.

### Techniques

Techniques are specialities bought within a particular skill. They
enable you to perform actions that would be impossible or hard without
it, or grant a bonus in certain situations (sometimes to related
skills).

## Setting and Style

YAGS does not try to cover all possible settings in one set of rules.
What is provided here is a wide range of skills and background options,
but only enough to cover the \'modern world\'. There are no options for
magic, since how magic is learnt and used can differ from setting to
setting. Likewise, there are no skills to cover piloting space craft or
operating energy shields or matter transmitters, since again how these
work differs between science fiction settings. Individual world books
will contain the unique information necessary to build characters for
these settings.

Finally, it is up to the Game Master to decide on the level of the
campaign - Mundane, Skilled, Exceptional, Heroic or Pulp Action, and any
other limits in place on the choice of characters and backgrounds.

## Supplementary Articles

YAGS is split into several articles, of which this is one, and a good
place to start if you want to create a character for yourself. Its focus
is on characters for modern settings, and though the rules will work for
any type of character, the listed skills are limited to those that a
modern character may find useful.

There are a number of articles which supplement Characters in a modern
setting.

The Core Rules provide a detailed description of the underlying rules,
and are mostly aimed at GMs wanting a setting and genre agnostic view
onto the system.

The Bestiary covers everything to do with animals and creatures,
including providing statistics for the most commonly encountered
animals.

Finally, High Tech describes weapons and equipment for the modern era -
from 1900 to the present day. It also covers vehicles and rules for
using them in a game.

# Your Character

Building a character for YAGS is a relatively straightforward process.
There are many choices available however, and as always it helps to have
a good idea of your character concept before you start. The setting of
the campaign will tend to limit this, and your GM may have some
suggestions as to what type of characters will find a useful role to
play.

YAGS is point based, and the number of points you get to spend depend on
the level of the game that the GM will be running. You get three point
pools to spend from - Attributes, Experience and Advantages. Your first
task is to prioritise these according to the type of character you wish
to play. You must choose one pool as your Primary, one as your Secondary
and the last as your Tertiary pool. The Primary pool gets the most
points to spend, and the Tertiary the least.

:::: note
::: title
:::

The points you get to create a character with are divided into a number
of different pools. This division serves two purposes. Firstly, it helps
to focus character design into easier to understand chunks. Secondly, it
helps to limit possible abuses of the design process by preventing
players from making extreme choices.
::::

The pools are not necessarily equal, but which are the most useful will
depend on the type of campaign and the type of character that you wish
to build.

## The Pools

### Attributes

Your attributes define the raw potential of your character. A character
with good attributes tends to be able to pick up new things reasonably
quickly. They can be fit, healthy, intelligent and charismatic. Whether
attributes can be raised after character generation depends on the
campaign style.

Hollywood action heroes will tend to have high attributes. A character
with high attributes and low skills represents the gifted amateur who
learns to quickly supersede their mentors.

When you prioritise attributes, you define both how many extra points
you get to spend, and the maximum level any single attribute can be.
This is shown as +points/maximum in the tables below.

### Experience

Experience represents skills and knowledge, generally gained through
training and real world experience. A character with a lot of experience
is probably older than those who lack it.

Academics, scientists and businessmen will tend to have a high
experience. These are often the support characters in fiction - less
heroic, but providing useful skills in specialised areas.

When you prioritise experience, you define both how many points you get
to spend on skills and techniques, and the maximum level of any single
skill. As for attributes, this is shown as points/maximum.

### Advantages

Heroes often have some out of the ordinary feature which separates them
from normal people. Advantages represent these features. By purchasing
advantages, you can make your character special in a certain way, either
physically, supernaturally or through background options such as wealth
or high status.

When you prioritise advantages, you define how many points of advantages
you may buy. You always have the option to purchase a single
disadvantage, which will provide you with extra points for more
advantages. This may be a \'-1\' disadvantage which gives you a single
extra point, or a \'-2\' or \'-3\' which give more points.

For every full 3 points of advantages you are given, you may take an
extra disadvantage for further points. Again, it is the number of
disadvantages that is limited, not the total value of them.

Lastly, advantages are your character\'s Schick, and as such can\'t be
purchased after character generation. They are also more durable than
equivalents gained through play. If you buy Rich, it is much harder to
lose your wealth than if you had obtained it in-game.

## The Priorities

Before you can begin character generation the GM will have set the
starting level of the campaign and dictated the type of characters you
will be playing. Mundane campaigns are about mostly normal people, so
are suitable for horror games and low fantasy. Exceptional campaigns are
about skilled and experienced people, and are suitable for mid-level
fantasy or science fiction campaigns. Heroic games are about larger than
life people similar to Hollywood action heroes.

### Mundane

Mundane campaigns are about normal people in abnormal situations (or
even normal people in normal situations). In this type of campaign,
characters are somewhat above average, but not significantly so.

This level of campaign is suitable for modern horror, or stories about
young, inexperienced knights at the start of their careers. There is no
reason that characters in such campaigns can\'t grow to become heroic,
but the story is often about their progression rather than what they do
once they become heroes.

The majority of people in the world will be of the Mundane level -
indeed, most will have a Tertiary level in each of the three categories.
Skilled professionals will tend to have Primary experience however.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Category                Primary         Secondary       Tertiary
  ----------------------- --------------- --------------- ---------------
  Attributes              +5/5            +2/4            0/4

  Experience              50/6            30/5            20/4

  Advantages              3               1               0
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Priority

For a truly mundane game, characters may be limited to taking two
Secondary and one Tertiary selections, or even a single Secondary and
two Tertiary. This however would not normally be recommended, since such
characters will be very limited in what they can do.

A professional level of skill is considered to be level 4, which costs
10 points, and taking more than two skills at this level is going to be
tricky unless experience is your primary pool. You may want to back up
your professional skills with some talents which are slightly cheaper to
raise to 4 (since they start at 2) and maybe some techniques to give you
that important edge.

Trying to be good at too many things will end up spreading your
capabilities too thinly, and mundane characters need to stay focussed.

In many mundane games characters can be expected to improve relatively
quickly over time, so there will always be room to expand your
capabilities and flesh out different skill areas as the game progresses.

Mundane campaigns are best for horror, low fantasy or gritty science
fiction. Characters will be young with their life (hopefully) ahead of
them.

### Skilled

Skilled characters are mundane with some extra skills. This level of
campaign is useful when the GM wants reasonably average characters, but
where their backgrounds imply more than the average number of skills -
for example, academics or trained professionals.

Such characters are recommended as the default for a modern setting,
unless the campaign is focussed around highly trained or heroic
characters, or it is a horror game where everything is meant to be
dangerous, and out to get you.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Category                Primary         Secondary       Tertiary
  ----------------------- --------------- --------------- ---------------
  Attributes              +5/5            +2/4            0/4

  Experience              100/6           60/5            40/4

  Advantages              3               1               0
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Priority

Characters in a Skilled campaign have twice as many starting experience
points as Mundane characters, giving you a lot more flexibility in
buying skills, especially if you want to take attributes as your primary
point pool.

You can be highly skilled (a skill level of 4+) in multiple skills and
still leave room for a number of low level skills to round yourself out.

Another alternative is to take attributes as primary and put the one
covering your main skills to 5. This allows you to be \'better\' than
professional level with a skill of only 3. However, it does limit the
techniques you can purchase for that skill.

Unless you really need to do otherwise in order to fit your character
concept, it is recommended that advantages are selected as a tertiary.
You can take a single (or two, if you have 3+ points to spend on
advantages) disadvantage of any cost to give you extra points to spend
on advantages. In the example of Jenny Galloway, she takes alcoholism as
a -3 disadvantage which gives her a total of 4 points to spend on
advantages.

### Exceptional

If you are playing in an exceptional campaign, then you will begin with
a character who is well above average in both attributes and skills
however you prioritise your pools.

Such campaigns are about exceptional people and high adventure. Most of
the people you meet will not be as good as you, allowing you to take on
greater dangers than in less high powered campaigns. However, by the
start of the campaign you are already a professional in what you do.
Such stories are not about a farm boy (or school teacher) who gets
caught up in an adventure by accident, but about adventurers who go
looking for something exciting.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Category                Primary         Secondary       Tertiary
  ----------------------- --------------- --------------- ---------------
  Attributes              +8/6            +5/5            +2/4

  Experience              100/7           75/6            50/5

  Advantages              4               2               1
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Priority

It is suggested that Exceptional characters begin the game with one free
point of Luck. This is in addition to any that they purchase with
advantages.

Exceptional characters will tend to be average in their weak areas,
rather than actually weak. Having said this, they are not far above the
norm in attributes, and may be the equivalent of highly skilled
professionals (knights, special forces, experienced smugglers etc) who
could pass themselves off as heroic with good planning and luck.

For skills, you can afford to spread out a bit and not have to worry
about concentrating in a single area.

### Heroic

In a heroic campaign you have skills and abilities well above the
majority of people. However you choose to spend your points, you are
going to be very good at what you do, being the equivalent of Hollywood
action heroes.

However, you shouldn\'t let this go to your head, since a single bullet
or well placed knife can still kill you just as easily as it could a
\'mundane\' person.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Category                Primary         Secondary       Tertiary
  ----------------------- --------------- --------------- ---------------
  Attributes              +12/8           +6/6            +3/5

  Experience              200/10          150/8           100/6

  Advantages              6               3               1
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Priority

In addition to the above, you should start the game with two free points
of Luck, in addition to any extra that you purchase with advantages.

You have the option of being above average in all your attributes, or
truly exceptional in a few of them. You could also be incredibly rich or
famous by taking advantages as your primary choice, or highly skilled by
going for experience. The choice is yours.

If you are concentrating on skills, then you have ample opportunity to
buy lots of techniques. This makes an Experience focused character
possibly the best for combat lethality. There are a lot of combat
related techniques, and as the example of Laura Connelly shows, taking a
good selection of them can make you a very deadly opponent.

Heroic characters are best suited for campaigns where the characters are
belong to a team of highly trained professionals, such as a special
forces squad or a group of veteran mercenaries.

### Pulp Action Heroes

Whether it\'s Space Opera, Chanbara, Wuxia or a Hollywood Action Film,
there is room in fiction for the larger than life action hero. Almost
super-heroic in their abilities, they are capable of taking on a small
army by themselves.

If you are playing this sort of campaign, then your character will be
significantly better than everyone else even in your weakest area.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Category                Primary         Secondary       Tertiary
  ----------------------- --------------- --------------- ---------------
  Attributes              +18/8           +12/6           +6/5

  Experience              450/12          300/10          200/8

  Advantages              8               4               2
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Priority

In addition to the above, you start the game with three free points of
Luck.

A GM putting together a Pulp Action campaign needs to be aware that
these characters, if designed to be combat focused, can take on most
enemies without too much difficulty. There will normally be few
opponents who are equally skilled, but you will most likely be going up
against powerful organisations who will try to overwhelm you with force
of numbers.

However, you are not immortal. You can be as tough and quick as you
like, but it will still be possible to down you with a single bullet. A
horde of mooks with automatic weapons will take you down if you are
standing out in the open. The trick is to use your abilities to make
sure that you always have the advantage.

If your planning fails you though, and a lucky shot takes you out, then
you can always make use of your Luck to negate the damage. Using Luck in
this way burns it, spending it permanently. But it\'s better than being
dead.

# Attributes

For player characters, attributes are generally rated on a scale of 1 to
10, with human PCs falling within the range of 2-8. Anything outside of
the range 2-5 however is significantly unusual for an adult human, and a
typical adult will have all their attributes at 3.

The number of points that may be spent on buying up an attribute depends
on the priority you chose for attributes and the level of campaign that
is being run.

Score

Cost and description

At the limit of human ability, which only a few people in human history
have attained.

The best Olympic athletes and the most renowned of academics will have
this level of attribute.

Far above human average, attained not by chance but through dedicated
training.

Obviously exceptional. Attributes higher than this are normally only
attained through training and dedication.

Significantly above average for an adult. About 5% of the population has
this level or above.

Typical average for an adult. About 90% of the population.

Significantly below average, the bottom 5%.

Obviously impaired compared to a typical human. An attribute of this
level is almost worthless.

Levels outside of the range 2-8 cannot be purchased, but are reserved
for alien species. Some aliens get a bonus or penalty to a given
attribute, and this bonus applies after you have purchased the
attribute. You may not purchase an attribute to a level that would cause
it to be shifted outside of the 1-10 range once species modifiers have
been applied.

## Attributes

There are 8 primary attributes to define, and all begin with a score of
3 (which is average for an adult human). Anything outside of the range
of 2-5 is considered to be very exceptional for a human, and attributes
above 8 are unheard of amongst humans.

How strong you are, including your ability to lift and hurt things. If
you have a high strength then you will tend to be larger as well.

A measure of your physical fitness and stamina. Health is used in checks
to remain alive after being seriously wounded. It also directly affects
the number of fatigue levels you have, which are useful in combat.

Your agility represents your quickness, athletic prowess and balance. It
is used for brawling, wrestling, sneaking, reaction tests and
acrobatics.

Dexterity is your hand-eye coordination, sleight-of-hand and skill with
melee weapons. Pistols also use dexterity, and rifles may use dexterity
or perception.

How alert you are, and the general quality of your senses. If
perceptive, you are good at hiding and noticing things. Rifles and
larger weapons use perception.

A measure of your wit, cunning, memory and intuition. Knowledges are
based on intelligence, as are logic and reasoning skills.

Empathy is your ability to understand others. It is used to make
friends, convince people emotionally, or to tell if someone is lying to
you. Empathy doesn\'t affect your intentions to be nice or nasty, but
does affect how well you notice other people\'s feelings.

Your Will is a measure of mental fortitude, being used to resist psi,
instincts and emotions. A high Will makes you a good liar, a low Will
means you are gullible and likely to give in to fear, lust and greed.

### Size, Soak and Move

There are also three further statistics which are special attributes.
These don\'t default to 3 for adult humans and can\'t be changed by
spending points from your attribute pool on them.

How large you are. An adult human has a Size of 5, though some may be as
low as 4 or as high as 6. Size governs how tough you are, and how hard
it is to kill you.

Soak defaults to 12 for an adult human, and defines your resistance to
damage. When you take damage, it is reduced by your soak. Armour adds to
your soak, improving your resistance to damage.

Your Move represents how quickly you can move, in metres per round. It
is 12 for a typical adult human, but is equal to your Size + Agility +
Strength + 1.

# Advantages

Advantages allow you to personalise your character by choosing traits
which make the character stand out above the rest of their society. Most
people will have no advantages.

Advantages can\'t be purchased after character generation. It may be
possible to obtain something similar in game (e.g., you could find a
dragon hoard and become Rich), but advantages are protected to some
degree - things gained within the game aren\'t.

:::: note
::: title
:::

Taking an advantage provides you with a shtick that sets your character
apart from others. They can\'t be \'bought off\' or purchased later
after character generation, and should also be hard to lose in-game.

If you do lose an advantage, there should be a later opportunity to
obtain it back. For example, if you are a Rich American businessman, and
lose everything when forced to flee your country due to some
\'misunderstanding\', then the GM should provide some in-game
opportunity to obtain wealth some other way. It doesn\'t mean it should
be easy, but the opportunity should be there, and may be the main focus
of the plot for several sessions.

Likewise, attempts to fix Bad back through surgery may provide short
term relief, but the operation may turn out to not be as successful as
first thought, or have unforeseen side effects.
::::

If an advantage or disadvantage will have an impact on the campaign,
then you should check with your GM first to make sure that they are
happy with it.

## Advantages

options/advantages.yags

options/modern.yags

## Disadvantages

options/disadvantages.yags

# Skills

Skills are those abilities which a character develops throughout their
life, and tend to change a lot more regularly than attributes do.

How good a character is at a skill is rated as a value from zero
upwards. A skill of four is acceptable for someone wanting to make a
living with the skill. Higher skills are possible, though skills above
six will be rare amongst the common population

## Types of Skills

### Standard skills

Most skills are considered to be standard skills. Such skills can be
learnt relatively easily, including being self taught. They can also be
used by a character who has a skill of zero, though such an attempt
fumbles on a natural one or two.

### Talents

Talents are skills which are known by everyone from childhood onwards.
They are treated just as standard skills, with the exception that all
characters start with a skill level of two in all talents.

There are only eight talents, and are listed by default on the character
sheet. Talents are sometimes marked with an asterisk (\*).

### Knowledges

A knowledge is a special type of skill which cannot be attempted unless
the character has a skill level of at least one. They can rarely be self
taught, requiring a teacher or study aid (such as a book) to learn from.

### Languages

Language skills are treated on a scale from one to four, and are not
normally \'rolled\' like other skills. Instead, the level of skill gives
a guide to how much of a conversation you can understand.

You automatically begin with a level of four in your native language,
plus four more levels to spend on other languages. It is assumed that
you are at least bilingual. Levels can be put on a single language
(making you fluent in two), or split between several languages (if your
native language is English (with a score of four), you could also have
French 2 and German 2).

If your native language is not the default for the campaign, then you
should have at least 3 in the campaign default so that you can
communicate with the other player characters in the game.

You can recognise the language and you know a few words, but cannot put
sentences together.

You can understand and form basic sentences, and can probably get by in
a market or a pub. However, you are noticeably a foreigner and difficult
to communicate with.

You have a good grasp of the language and can hold a decent
conversation. You are still obviously a foreigner, and struggle over
unusual words.

You are fluent in the language. You will still have an accent if this is
not your native language, but you will not have any problems
communicating.

If you are a non-native speaker then you can speak without an accent.
This level and beyond gives detailed knowledge of the language,
including dialects and really obscure words, but it is not of use in
everyday conversation.

### Educated Characters

In some settings it is normal for the majority of people to have some
form of education. Rather than either forcing all characters to buy a
suitable number of skills, or giving those skills for free, YAGS allows
Educated characters to default to an Intelligence check for anything
covered by a standard education.

For a \'western\' education, it can be assumed that geography, history,
science, mathematics, computer operation, drive, religion and politics
are covered by this.

An Educated character can make an Intelligence test, halved, for any of
these skills. The Area lore skill can also be used for general knowledge
about society and culture. This level of education is assumed to be
\'GCSE\' level or equivalent - up to age 16.

Further education, up to A\'level would be covered by a relevant skill
at a level of two. A basic university education would give a skill of
about four at time of graduation, possibly with one or two suitable
techniques.

## Skill Rules

### Defaults

Some skills have a default - this will generally be one of the talents.
If desired, the default can be used instead, but the result (after the
die roll) is halved, plus the chance of fumbling is doubled.

A default skill may also restrict the type of tasks which are possible.
For example, Trade defaults to Guile, but the latter can only be used to
barter, and isn\'t much use if the character needs to know the real
value of goods.

### Pre-requisites

A few skills have pre-requisites. Before this skill can be purchased at
level one, all pre-requisites must be met. A skill like Medicine might
have a pre-requisite of First Aid-2 for example, which means that First
Aid must be known at level 2 before Medicine can be bought.

Further, the main skill may never be more than double the level of any
of the pre-requisites. You cannot put points into a skill if the next
level of skill is not allowed.

### Limited Skills

Under some genres, a skill may be limited by another skill. This concept
is mostly limited to knowledge or science skills. When a skill is
limited by another skill, the first skill may never be more than half
the score of the second.

For example, during the Enlightenment, when Science was being
discovered, the Science skill is limited by Natural Philosophy. If you
have a Natural Philosophy of 7, then your Science cannot be higher than
3 (since raising it any higher would make it greater than 3.5). Once
your Natural Philosophy has been raised to 8, then you may begin to
raise your Science to 4.

You may not put points into a skill if the next level of skill is not
allowed.

### Skill Techniques

A Technique is a specialisation of a skill, and may provide bonuses or
allow some particular special action to be attempted. A skill may have
several techniques associated with it, and some techniques can be used
with more than one skill. In the latter case, the technique only needs
to be purchased once - it can then be used with any skill which uses it,
as long as the skill is of sufficient level.

A technique has a cost associated with it, which is the number of
experience points which need to be spent to buy it. A level 6 technique
costs 6 points to buy. The cost of the technique is also the minimum
skill level that must be achieved before the technique can be purchased.
If you do not have the required skill at a sufficient level, then the
technique can\'t be bought.

Finally, a technique may have a prerequisite. These are the techniques
which must be known before this technique can be learnt.

:::: example
::: title
:::

Hard to kill is a level 2 technique which is based on the Brawl skill.
To buy it, you must have a brawl of at least 2, at which point you can
spend 2 points to buy Hard to kill.

Ignore pain is a level 4 technique which is based on Brawl and which has
Hard to kill as a prerequisite. If you have a Brawl skill of 4 or more,
and have already purchased Hard to kill, then you can spend 4 points to
buy Ignore Pain.
::::

Some techniques will be based on a skill group rather than a skill. In
this case the technique can be purchased when any skill in that group
reaches the technique\'s level, but it can only be used with those
skills of sufficient level.

#### Familiarity Techniques

Skills are generally broad, and a single skill can cover usage of many
different types of similar things. For example, Driving covers
everything from Motorbikes to heavy goods vehicles.

A skill which requires familiarity will list the common familiarities
for that skill. When you first buy the skill at level 1, you may chose
one familiarity for free. All others must be paid for.

If you aren\'t familiar with the thing you are trying to use, then you
suffer penalties:

You cannot use any other techniques with the skill if you are not
familiar with the subject.

You can never gain more than a moderate level of success when using the
skill.

The fumble chance is increased by +1 per 10 points of difficulty for the
check.

A familiarity costs two points, which means you can\'t obtain further
familiarities until you have a skill of 2+. If you have two or more
skills which list the same familiarity, then you only need to buy it
once.

#### Specialisation Techniques

Some skills are noted as allowing specialisations. These are broad
skills which cover a wide range of topic areas, examples being Science
and History. There is a single skill which covers all topics under the
heading, but it is possible to specialise by buying specialisation
techniques.

Generally, these are unlisted, and you may chose any specialisation you
wish for the cost listed by the skill. For example, you could purchase
Physics-4 as a Science specialisation.

Specialisations tasks easier within that skill. Generally, the base
difficulty of a knowledge task is based on how specific the type of
knowledge is. For example, if you known Science, and want to know how to
design a nuclear bomb, then that\'s quite a deep specialisation, and
require a base difficulty of 40 for a simple design.

If you had a specialisation in Nuclear Weapons, then designing becomes a
standard task, so would only be difficulty 10. If your specialisation
was Nuclear Physics, then bomb design is relatively specialised, so
might be 20. Likewise, designing a nuclear power station might also be
20.

There is no limit to how broad or narrow a specialisation may be. The
broader it is, the more topics it covers, but each topic will be a
deeper specialisation. It is recommended (though not required) that you
take levels of specialisations, starting with broad topics and narrowing
down. Being specialised in Nuclear Weapons without having at least a
Physics specialisation would require some explaining.

## Skills

The following list of skills is not exhaustive, but covers the most
common set of skills found in a low tech campaign setting. The following
example shows what a skill entry looks like.

Science

Healing

First aid

First aid

This skill can be used to try and make people better when they aren\'t
feeling very well.

Try to figure out what is wrong with someone.

:::: example
::: title
:::

Cure a headache.
::::

:::: example
::: title
:::

Put a leg back on.
::::

The heading gives the name of the skill, followed by whether it is a
knowledge, talent or language in parenthesis.

The second line displays all the skill groups that the skill belongs to.
These are sometimes used for purposes of bonuses which apply to a
category of skills.

Next is given the skill default and pre-requisites (if any). The score
given for the pre-requisite is the minimum score that is needed in the
required skill before this skill can be bought.

For skills which have techniques associated with them, then these will
be listed as well.

The main body of text describes the skill - what it does and how it can
be used. Some skills can be used in different ways for different tasks,
and if these sub tasks are sufficiently different or important, then
they will be listed under a sub heading (for our Medicine example,
Diagnosis is listed as a sub-task).

Finally, example skill difficulties may be given. These are suggested
target numbers for achieving given tasks.

## Skills by Groups

The following lists all the skills according to various groups. Skills
which belong to more than one group are listed multiple times. When
designing a character that you want to be good at some type of thing,
these grouping can give an idea about which skills to buy.

skills/standard-skills.yags

skills/vehicle-skills.yags

skills/combat-skills.yags

skills/academic-skills.yags

skills/technical-skills.yags

skills/business-skills.yags

skills/investigation-skills.yags

skills/occult-skills.yags

skills/outdoor-skills.yags

## Skill Descriptions

skills/standard-skills.yags

skills/vehicle-skills.yags

skills/combat-skills.yags

skills/academic-skills.yags

skills/technical-skills.yags

skills/business-skills.yags

skills/investigation-skills.yags

skills/occult-skills.yags

skills/outdoor-skills.yags

techniques/academic.yags

techniques/combat.yags

techniques/firearms.yags

techniques/melee.yags

techniques/outdoor.yags

techniques/physical.yags

techniques/social.yags

techniques/technical.yags

techniques/vehicle.yags

## Techniques

Techniques represent specialist training in a particular use of a skill.
They can provide a bonus in certain situations, or allow you to perform
an action which wouldn\'t otherwise be possible.

:::: note
::: title
:::

Techniques can be viewed as an optional part of the game system. They
add a lot of flavour and detail to the skill system, and provide a means
to differentiate between characters who simply have raw talent (high
attributes and basic skill) and those how are highly trained (high skill
with a lot of techniques). However, there can be quite a few to keep
track of.

If you wish a simpler system, then ignoring techniques is perfectly
possible without causing major problems. Adding them in later is also
possible, simply by allowing players to start purchasing them.
::::

The standard techniques are available below.

### Academic Techniques

The Academic techniques cover the sciences and other areas of knowledge.
Generally, each is a specialisation within a subject - so the Physics
skill will have techniques for Nuclear Physics, Relativity etc.

techniques/academic.yags

### Combat Techniques

These techniques are for general use in combat. Techniques specific to
firearms or melee weapons are listed separately later.

techniques/combat.yags

### Firearms Techniques

techniques/firearms.yags

### Melee Techniques

The Melee skill covers a wide range of fighting styles and weapons, but
assumes a relatively general knowledge of fighting. These techniques
allow you to specialise in a particlar style of fighting suited for a
culture or type of weapon.

techniques/melee.yags

### Outdoor Techniques

techniques/outdoor.yags

### Physical Techniques

techniques/physical.yags

### Social Techniques

techniques/social.yags

### Technical Techniques

techniques/technical.yags

### Vehicle Techniques

techniques/vehicle.yags

# Improvement

A central facet of many RPGs is that a character can improve as the game
progressions. This isn\'t a universal rule however, and it suits some
type of fiction better than others. Much fantasy fiction revolves around
a young, inexperienced hero with much untapped potential gaining that
experience, and becoming a skilled champion in an infeasibly short
period of time. Modern or science fiction tends to focus on already
experienced characters who need to use their existing skills to survive.
There are many examples which go against this trend, but it can be a
useful distinction to make.

## Heroic Experience

If, as a GM, you wish characters to improve rapidly in their skill sets,
then it is suggested that experience is handed out at the end of each
gaming session, possibly 1-3 points. Players can use this to improve
their character\'s skills or techniques, at a maximum of 1 point on any
single skill per session, and possibly limited to skills which could
sensibly have improved.

This gives players a lot of control over what skills go up, and will
tend to lead to PCs having a few high skills. Note that this does allow
characters to go from totally untrained to professional level (4) in 10
game sessions - which may be only a few days or few weeks of game time.

Instead of placing experience onto a skill, the player may place it into
a technique. There is no limit to how many experience points can be
placed into a single technique at once, which can make it easier to buy
techniques than to put up the skill.

Optionally, a point may be granted at the end of each story arc (or at
dramatically appropriate moments) which may be spent on attributes.
Attributes can be raised in the same way as skills - 1 point per level
of attribute you are raising to. This shouldn\'t amount to more than a
few points a year for young characters, or more than a point a year for
more experienced characters.

## Realistic Experience

Alternatively, it may be desired to opt for a slower approach to skill
improvement that is somewhat more realistic. This allows characters to
pick up experience during down time within the game, rather than from
actual adventures.

### Background Experience

Characters in a new area may pick up language and area lore skills if
they don\'t already have them. If they have a skill less than 2, they
may gain 1 XP towards these skills each week they have an opportunity to
learn. If they have a skill of 2-3, then they may gain 1 XP each month.

Each week or month of game time, roll a d20, and on a 10+ you gain 1 XP
towards the skill. Once the skill reaches 4, it won\'t improve in this
way. This does assume that you are interacting with other people (in the
case of language) or exploring (for area lore). If you aren\'t doing
this at all, then no XP will be gained. If you are doing it in a limited
way, then you need a 15+. If the have the Tourist advantage, then you
gain a bonus to this roll.

It is reasonable to combine this advancement option with heroic
experience. Doing so allows characters to focus on the skills that
matter to their character concept, without sacrificing knowledge skills
they would realistically be picking up.

### Job Based Learning

Similar to Background Experience, it can be assumed that you will pick
up knowledge related to a job. If you are performing full-time duties
which require skill use, then you may pick up experience on the job.
Many skills will have multiple skills associated with them, in which
case choose the most appropriate, or the lowest skill.

Skill gain is similar to Background Experience, so you have a chance of
gaining a point each week if your skill is less than two, or each month
if it is less than four.

As before, you are limited to gaining a skill of 4 (professional level)
in this way, and it should take about 16 months to get to this level.

It is possible for this experience to be put into familiarity or
specialisation techniques.

### Dedicated Training

It is always possible to gain skill through dedicated training in that
skill. This requires finding a tutor, often paying them for their time.
A training session takes a week for techniques, or if your current skill
is less than four. For higher skills, it takes a month.

As for other methods of learning, roll a d20 to see if you gain any
experience in the trained skill. For techniques or skills less than 4,
the target is 10+. For skills up to 7, the target is 15+ and if your
current skill is 8 or higher, the target is 20+.

If you are being taught by a trainer who actually has the Teach skill,
then reduce the difficulty by the level of their skill.

Target

Condition

Base target number if training in a technique, or in a skill which is
currently less than 4.

Base target number if skill is currently in the 4-7 range.

Base target number if skill is currently 8+.

-1 for each point of \'Teach\' skill that the teacher has.

If training facilities are of high quality, with lots of resources.
Military training grounds would often qualify.

For each point that the trainer\'s skill is lower than the student\'s.

When teaching a technique, the trainer must already know the technique.
When teaching a skill, the trainer must have a skill of at least 4, and
at least half the student\'s current skill otherwise training is not
possible.

At the end of the training period, roll a simple d20 and on success 1 XP
is gained towards the skill or technique. If the roll is 10 or more over
the target difficulty, gain 2 XP instead.

# 

# 
