YAGS

Basic core rules for the YAGS combat system, aiming for a
gritty-cinematic style of play. Includes rules for melee, unarmed
combat, missile combat and modern firearms. Rules for getting wounded,
and getting healed are also included.

Samuel Penn

sam@notasnark.net

\$Revision: 0.8.0 \$

\$Date: 2007-07-29 20:34:33 \$

2021

Samuel Penn

This document can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of
the GNU Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation
version 2.

# Basic Combat

We got tactical smart missiles, phase-plasma pulse rifles, RPGs, we got
sonic electronic ball breakers! We got nukes, we got knives, sharp
sticks\...

Combat in YAGS can be bloody and brutal, and can often lead to the death
of those who are ill-prepared or over confident. You may be a hero, but
a sharp stick or lucky bullet can still take you down just as quickly as
it can an unskilled opponent.

However, combat in YAGS is also geared towards Cinematic Realism - it
may be gritty and lean towards realism where possible, but it allows you
to be heroic as long as you\'re clever as well. The advantage goes to
whoever has surprise or a careful plan. Having both is even better.

As with the rest of the system, combat in YAGS is reasonably detailed,
but tries to be quick and consistent. Complexity is added where it is
believed that it adds to the flavour of a game.

## Organisation of These Rules

These rules have been organised so as to keep the simple stuff first,
then go into more detail later. The first few sections actually gives
you everything you need to know to run combat using YAGS. If all you
want is a simple and fast combat system, then you can stick with that.

The later sections go into more detail however, providing a bit more
colour to the rules, and covering situations more extensively. If you
don\'t care about different armour types or ways of using a gun, then
you can ignore them.

## General Terminology

The following terms are used frequently within these rules, so they are
described up front. A full description of how they are used will be
given later.

A round is a unit of time, averaging about five seconds. Each round, you
have chance to perform a single action - normally an attack or a move.

Body levels represent your ability to absorb damage in the form of
wounds and stuns. It is determined by your size, so most adult humans
have the same number of body levels - five.

Soak is how good you are at resisting (soaking) damage. An adult human
will usually have a soak of 12. Armour can add to this, reducing the
chance that an attack damages you.

Wounds are serious injuries which have a good chance of causing death.
Martial weapons such as swords or spears, as well as guns and bows cause
wounds.

Stuns are non-serious injuries which rarely kill, being generally
limited to cuts and bruises. Fists, sticks and chairs are likely to stun
you.

Knives, clubs and animal claws or teeth are more likely to kill you than
a fist, but aren\'t as deadly as a sword or gun. They do mixed damage,
which is split between stuns and wounds with odd damage doing on stuns.

Sometimes (if you\'re lucky), an attacker may find it very hard to hurt
you. In this case their attack is considered ineffective. They do stun
damage, but the number of stuns is halved (rounding down).

Fatigue is a measure of how tired you are, and how much fatigue you can
take before falling over is based on your Health. Fatigue is recovered
after a short rest.

Exhaustion is similar to fatigue, but can only be recovered with sleep.
It is gained from long term physical activity such as hiking or heavy
labour.

Damage is what causes stuns or wounds. You roll the damage and subtract
the target\'s soak. Every five points left causes one stun or wound.

Load is used to measure the weight and bulkyness of weapons and armour.
The higher the load, the higher Strength you need to have to be able to
use the item without penalty.

Stance determines how a combatant is fighting, the most common being
normal, aggressive and defensive. Prone and unsteady are two stances
which a character can be forced into.

An extra attack which may be taken immediately against a given opponent.
The opponent gets a free defence roll, at the same penalty as other
defence rolls that round if multiple defences have been declared.

An extra attack which make be taken immediately after the opponent\'s
action which triggered it, but otherwise treated as a free strike.

An extra attack which may be taken immediately against a given opponent.
The opponent does not get a defence roll, so the attack is against the
base difficulty to hit the target.

The three statistics which define the bonuses a weapon provides to skill
and damage rolls in combat (attack, defence and damage).

Initiative determines the order in which everybody acts, from highest
initiative to lowest. Actions are split into fast, normal and slow. All
fast actions happen first, then normal actions, then slow actions.

Any melee weapon which does better than stun damage and has a reach
greater than zero.

The distance to a target for missile weapons, measured in metres. This
affects how hard it is to hit the target, and my be modified up or down
depending on other factors (such as if you\'re running whilst trying to
shoot).

The effective range of missile weapons, measured in metres. This is
unaffected by modifiers to the Distance, and effects how much damage the
weapon does.

The reach of a melee weapon is an indication of how long it is, and
weapons with longer reach have an advantage against shorter reach
weapons. In a confined space however, longer reach weapons have a
disadvantage. Missile weapons also have a reach, which indicates how
suitable they are in close combat.

Particularly painful types of damage can cause shock, which reduces your
initiative.

An active defence is normally a dodge or a parry. You must be aware of
the attack to be able to make an active defence, and you have a limited
number you can make in a round.

You passive defence is a fixed number, and is the difficulty for someone
to hit you when you aren\'t performing an active defence. It is normally
15.

### Combat skills

Silly Caucasian girl likes to play with Samurai swords.

There are a huge variety of different weapons that can be used in
combat, from knives to two handed swords, from pistols to sniper rifles
and light machine guns. However, you don\'t need to learn a different
skill for each one.

All forms of unarmed combat, including punching, kicking, biting and
wrestling. It also covers use of small (non-martial) weapons. All
specialist martial arts (such as karate or marines close combat) are
specialisations of brawl.

Using a melee weapon of any type, from knives to maces or long swords.
Use of shields also comes under melee.

Throwing weapons of any type, including knives, spears, stones or
bottles. Using a sling or atlatl also comes under throw.

Using personal guns, including pistols, SMGs, assault rifles, shotguns
and sniper rifles.

All types of bows including short bows, longbows and crossbows.

Large, normally vehicle mounted, guns. Defaults to the Guns skills.

Techniques provide the ability to specialise in particular types of
weapons or styles of combat, and a true master will do this. You can use
a sword and shield with the Melee skill, but knowing the Weapon and
shield technique makes it easier to defend against multiple opponents,
or to use the shield offensively at the same time for example.

### Weapons

Every melee weapon provides three combat bonuses - attack, defence and
damage which add to the attack, defence an damage rolls of a character.

Missile weapons have a short, medium and long range which determine
their maximum effectiveness. They also have an increment, which is a
measure of their accuracy and determines how hard it is to hit a target.

There are plenty of other statistics for each weapon, but these three
are the primary ones which are used in the basic combat system.

### Armour

Every creature has a basic soak score, which reduces the damage done to
them in an attack. Armour gives a protective bonus which adds to this
soak, though it can reduce your movement.

Armour is either light or heavy. The former isn\'t as effective against
weapons designed to penetrate armour, but is often less likely to
restrict your movement. In modern settings, some armour is also rated as
being bulletproof. If it isn\'t, then effectiveness against firearms is
greatly reduced.

Armour also has a Load, which can range from zero up to eight or more.
As long as the total load of all your armour does not exceed your
Strength, then you can wear it without penalty. You start suffering
penalties to Agility, as well as an increased fumble chance, if your
load exceeds your Strength. The latter means that your chance of gaining
Fatigue is increased.

There are techniques that experienced warriors can use to reduce this
penalty.

As for weapons, there are other attributes that armour can have.
Different types of weapons are designed for use against different types
of armour, so what you wear may be dictated by what you are going up
against.

# The Combat Sequence

Once characters enter into a combat, game time is measured in rounds of
approximately five seconds. At the start of each combat everybody
determines their initiative which remains fixed for the entire combat.
Initiative is rolled using:

intelligence

4

If you fumble your initiative roll (with a natural 1), then your
initiative total is zero. Whilst you have an initiative of zero, all
your skill rolls are halved, and all your actions are slow (meaning that
you always act last each round). As an action, you can opt to re-roll
your initiative during the combat, but doing so precludes any other
activity that round (including movement and defences). However, this is
considered a skill check so is halved.

If you do have an initiative of zero, then you can always choose to gain
a level of fatigue to act normally that round (albiet with an initiative
of zero). This can be used when re-rolling initiative.

It is possible for some attacks to reduce your initiative during a
combat, down to a minimum of zero. At this point, you suffer the same
penalties as above.

## The Combat Round

Each round of combat follows a set series of steps. Once a round has
been completed, combat either ends or everyone starts a new round.
Initiative is very important in combat, since a high initiative gives
you a big tactical advantage over everyone else.

Everybody declares their actions in increasing initiative order.
Attacks, number of defences, movement and other actions are declared at
this point.

All fast actions are performed in decreasing initiative order.

Perform all normal actions in decreasing order of initiative.

Perform all slow actions in decreasing order of initiative.

End of round book keeping, including making rolls to remain conscious
and alive (if necessary) and any required morale checks.

## Declaring Actions

At the start of each round, all combatants declare their actions in
order of increasing initiative. This gives characters with a high
initiative a big tactical advantage over everybody else. Initiative
should be thought of as an abstraction of both physical speed and
tactical ability.

All declared actions are public, even if someone is out of sight at the
start of the round. If you are hidden and out of sight, and wish to
declare that you are leaping out to attack someone, then anyone who has
a higher initiative than you gets the opportunity to react to your
action before you do it - effectively they get to act between you making
yourself visible and actually performing the attack.

### Declaring Attacks

You may declare an attack against a target. Any movement required in
order to make the attack is implied. The weapon and skill being used,
plus any special actions, must be declared at this point.

### Declaring Defences

You must declare the number of defences though do not need to declare
who they are against. Each declared defence will defend against any
number of attacks from a single attacker. Defending against multiple
attackers means you suffer a penalty to all attacks and defences that
round.

Defences

Penalty

There is a maximum number of defences that you may declare in a round.
Normally this is equal to the average of your agility and perception
(rounded up), which is 3 for typical characters.

If you are making a melee attack but do not declare a defence against
the target, then they get a counter strike against you after your attack
has been resolved (assuming that they are still standing).

### Waiting

If you have lost the initiative, you may declare a wait action. You must
say what event you are waiting for, and what you will do if it occurs.
If the event doesn\'t happen, then you don\'t do anything that round.
You cannot state that you will do one thing if something happens, and
another thing if it doesn\'t.

### Movement

You may declare a move as part of your action. You can normally move up
to a number of metres equal to half your Move score without penalty.

If you wish to move further, you can move your full Move, but can only
perform a standard attack which is slow. Movement faster than this
precludes making an attack action.

## Performing Actions

Once everyone has declared their actions, then everyone gets to perform
their actions in decreasing order of initiative. First, everyone who has
a fast action will act (in initiative order), then all normal actions
and finally all slow actions.

### Making an attack

When an attack is made, the defender must declare whether they are using
a defence action before any rolls are made. If they do not do so, then
the target difficulty of the attack is 15.

To attack, make a melee attack roll using your relevant combat skill
modified by the attack bonus of the weapon. Brawl attaks use Agility and
Melee attacks use Dexterity.

attribute

skill

weapon attack bonus

If the target is defending, then they get to make an active defence
roll. If not, then the target difficulty of the attack is equal to their
passive defence, which is normally 15.

attribute

skill

weapon defence bonus

If the attack roll is equal to or greater than the defence, then the
target has been hit, and damage should be determined.

### Inflicting Damage

If you have successfully hit your target, then you make a damage roll. A
damage roll never fumbles.

strength

1

weapon damage bonus

Your damage roll is compared to the target\'s soak, including any
bonuses they have from armour. If the damage is greater than or equal to
the target\'s soak, then damage has been caused, otherwise the blow was
not of sufficient strength to cause any real harm.

If damage is done, then one wound will be caused plus one for every five
points the damage was above the soak. If the target is already wounded,
then any new wounds add to the existing wounds. If they have two wounds
(light, -5), and receive another two wounds, they will now have four
wounds (heavy, -15).

Wounds

Effect

Completely uninjured.

Scratched and bruised, but no penalty.

Lightly wounded, with a small (-5) penalty to all actions.

Moderate wounds, significant pain.

Heavily wounded, with a large penalty.

Critically wounded. Most people will stop fighting at this point. Heroes
and professional warriors will probably continue however.

A fatally wounded person must make health rolls to remain conscious and
alive every round. Without medical aid, they will die.

As long as you are alive, you will never be in a state worse than
fatally wounded.

As soon as you receive damage that takes you to fatally wounded or
beyond, you must make a health check at a target of 20 + 5 per extra
wound. So, if you were heavily wounded (4 wounds), and took 3 wounds of
damage, you would be making a check against a target of 25 (fatal, +1
extra).

If you fail this check, then you die, otherwise you fall unconscious. If
you make a good success, then you can continue fighting, but must make
another check at the end of each round at a target of 20. If you are
unconscious or resting you only need to make a check once every minute.

#### Stun Damage

Whilst wounds represent damage that is likely to kill you, stuns
represent scratches and bruises that will heal naturally within a few
days.

Brawling and similar attacks will do stun damage. Stuns are inflicted in
much the same way as wounds are, with an opposed damage and soak rolls.
However, stuns are not cumulative. If you receive more stuns in a single
blow than you currently have, then the new number of stuns replaces what
you had previously. If you receive at least half your current stun
level, you gain one stun.

Stuns

Effect

Completely uninjured.

Minor scratches, no penalty.

Slightly bruised and in some pain, but likely to be recovered after the
battle. Visible bruises and marks.

Moderate stuns, will look to be in quite bad shape.

Heavily stunned, probably with most of body covered in bruises and cuts
and in quite a bit of pain.

Critically stunned. Most people will stop fighting at this point, since
they are quite close to falling over.

A beaten person must make a health check to remain conscious every round
they wish to act.

For example, you are currently uninjured, but are punched by someone who
does you two stuns. You are now lightly stunned (at -5). You are punched
again for two stuns. This gives you one extra stun, taking you to three
stuns (moderate, -10). A third punch only does one stun, and since this
is less than half your current total, it does no damage.

The fourth punch is much harder, and does 5 stuns of damage. This is
greater than your current total (3), so puts you immediately at 5 stuns
(critical, -25).

If your stuns ever reach Beaten, then you must make a health check as
for wounds, but failure makes you unconscious, and success leaves you
standing.

Note that stuns and wounds are kept track of separately, and their
penalties add together. If you have 3 stuns (moderate, -10) and two
wounds (light, -5) you have a total penalty of -15.

#### Mixed Damage

The final type of damage is Mixed. Mixed damage is split between stuns
and wounds, with the first going on stuns. Mixed damage adds
cumulatively to both stuns and wounds. If you have four stuns, and take
one level of mixed damage, you take one stun, giving you five stuns
total.

## End of Round

At the end of each round, any general book keeping can be performed. If
health rolls are needed to remain conscious, then they are made now.

# 

# 

# 

# 
