YAGS

Basic core rules for YAGS, describing how the underlying mechanics work.

Samuel Penn

sam@notasnark.net

\$Revision: 0.8.0 \$

\$Date: 2012-12-20 12:00:00 \$

2019

Samuel Penn

This document can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of
the GNU Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation
version 2.

# What is YAGS?

YAGS is Another Game System, one that is meant to provide a free,
generic and modular set of rules for table top roleplaying. YAGS is
designed to provide a realistic, but also cinematic, set of rules that
allow fast play without compromising on detail when it\'s needed.

YAGS has a flexible skill based system for determining how competent
characters are. There are no levels or classes, and skills cover a wide
(technically unlimited) range to allow character growth over a long
campaign.

:::: note
::: title
:::

These Core rules are meant for game masters or game designers who want a
low level view of the rules for YAGS. It is completely setting and genre
agnostic, not meant as an introduction to the game.

It is recommended that first time readers start with one of the
Characters articles, which will provide an introduction to the game as
well as provide rules for character generation.
::::

YAGS is modular, and split into a number of different articles so that
you can pick and chose which rules are best for your game. The idea is
that the core rules are adapted for different settings and genres -
there are multiple character articles for example, which tweak character
generation to fit that style of game.

This article is the Core Rules, which describe the basic system on which
everything else is based. It assumes that you know what a roleplaying
game is, doesn\'t include any rules on building characters and only
includes descriptions of the most basic skills. For most people, reading
one of the Character articles first would be a better place to start.

All these rules are available for download for free from the YAGS
website.

## Genre and style

YAGS is designed to be flexible and generic, but any system will tend to
encourage a certain style just by how the rules work. YAGS is designed
to be fairly realistic, encouraging a low fantasy, gritty style of game
with a deadly combat system.

However, realism can be hard to determine, and most people who play
roleplaying games have never been shot at, fought a knight with a sword
or battled dragons and zombies armed with nothing more than a rusty axe
and a chainsaw. Because of this, YAGS mixes realism with a form of
cinematic realism.

A bullet can kill you, and mooks armed with automatic weapons will
always be dangerous regardless of your skill. But there\'s no reason
that a skilled character couldn\'t take on that group of mooks using
careful tactics, making good use of stealth, cover and surprise.

## Freedoms

YAGS is Free content. This does not mean that you do not need to pay to
download it (though you don\'t), but that you are free to do what you
want with the rules under the terms of the GPL version 2 (just like the
free operating system Linux for example). This means that you have:

The freedom to read, perform, display or run the work for any purpose.

The freedom to study how the work was created, and adapt it to your
needs. Access to the work in the preferred form for modification is a
precondition for this.

The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbour.

The freedom to improve the work, and release your improvements to the
public, so that the whole community benefits. Access to the preferred
form for modification is a precondition for this.

This does mean you may republish (or even sell) these rules yourself,
even if you have modified them. The only limitation is that all
published versions of these rules (including modifications) must also be
published under the GPL version 2, and that editable, electronic
versions must be provided as source.

:::: note
::: title
:::

A rules system that is Free to modify and distribute can be tailored for
use by a group to match their own playing styles. Gamers do this anyway,
but YAGS is designed to make this easy. You can make changes to the
rules and print your own copy - no more need for scribbled notes in the
margins.
::::

# The Core Mechanics

YAGS has a relatively simple set of basic rules which form the core of
the rest of the system. This article provides a detailed description of
these core rules for those interested in the basic mechanics or GMs
wanting to extend YAGS. For character generation, specific skill lists
and the like see the Character articles.

## Terminology

The following terminology is used throughout the YAGS rules. Where these
terms are used, the specific definitions given here are what is meant.

One of the eight basic numbers which define any creature in YAGS. A
typical adult human has a score of 3 in all their attributes.

A skill defines a creature\'s training and experience in a narrow field.
Skills are combined with attributes to determine a creature\'s ability
at a task. A professional level is skill is 4+.

A creature\'s ability to achieve success in a task is equal to an
attribute multiplied by a skill, or an attribute multiplied by 4 for a
raw attribute check.

The raw numerical value of any characteristic, unmodified by anything
else. A skill score would be a creature\'s rating in a skill, before it
is multiplied by an attribute.

An activity that requires an ability check. To make a check, roll 1d20
and add your ability.

A single twenty sided die, a d20.

A number which represents how difficult a task is. You must roll your
ability + d20 and equal or exceed the TN of the task to succeed. A
moderate (average) task has a TN of 20.

## Task Resolution

Task resolution is often at the heart of any game system. In the case of
YAGS, there is a single mechanic which applies to all tasks which is
based on an ability check. This check is used to determine not only
whether you succeed, but also how well you succeed.

The GM should determine the most suitable attribute and skill
combination to use, and set a target number (TN) for the task. Very easy
tasks have a TN of 10, moderate tasks have a TN of 20 and difficult
tasks have a TN of 30. In some cases you may need to make a check just
against an attribute (for example, a Health check to remain conscious)
where no skill is involved.

To make a skill check, you roll Attribute x Skill + 1d20, and if it
equals or exceeds the Target Number (TN) then you succeed.

To make a pure attribute check, then you roll Attribute x 4 + 1d20, and
if it equals or exceeds the Target Number (TN) then you succeed.

If the d20 rolls a natural \'1\', then you automatically fail. This is
the \'fumble chance\', and is normally 1. In some situations, the fumble
chance will be higher. If the fumble chance is 3, then a roll of \'1\',
\'2\' or \'3\' will result in failure.

If it is important how well you succeed, then every 10 points by which
you beat the TN is considered an extra level of success. Simply beating
the TN is considered a moderate success, beating it by 10 or more is a
good success (2 levels), by 20 or more is excellent and 30+ is superb.

Roll

Level of Success

success.

success.

success.

success.

success.

Sometimes, a skill contest is called for between two or more characters.
In this case, instead of trying to beat a set TN, you try to beat your
opponent\'s ability check.

If you are competing against another character, then you both make an
ability check, and the highest roll wins. On a tie, the person with the
highest skill score wins.

In a skill contest, if one of you rolls a natural \'20\' then you
automatically win if your skill score is higher than your opponents.

### Skilled Professionals

If you have a score of 4 or higher in a skill, then you are considered
to be a professional and have a couple of extra options available to
you.

In any non-opposed situation which is predictable, you may assume a roll
of \'0\'. This negates the chance of a fumble, but also means that the
task has to be well within your capability.

If such a situation is non-stressful, in that there is not an immediate
risk of harm and you can take your time, then you can assume a roll of
\'10\'. This removes the risk of fumbling, but takes twice as long as
normal.

If the fumble chance is greater than 1, then the task is automatically
considered non-predictable so these options can\'t be taken.

Whether a task is predictable or stressful is ultimately up to the GM to
decide.

# Characteristics

As with many game systems, YAGS measures the ability of a character in
the game using numerical statistics, called attributes and skills. These
numbers don\'t relate directly to anything in the real world - they are
simply a convenient way to compare one character to another.

Since YAGS is a game about human comparable characters, the statistics
are designed to be easy to use when describing such characters. It is
not so simple if used to compare the very small (rodents and insects),
or the very large (giant mecha or world ships). These things aren\'t
outside the scope of the game, but their involvement requires some
special rules. For the former, see the Bestiary, for the latter see the
vehicle rules in High Tech or SciFi.

## Attributes

There\'s no gene for fate.

Attributes are the basic characteristics of all creatures in YAGS, and
are a broad measure of natural talent and potential. There are eight
primary attributes - strength, health, agility, dexterity, perception,
intelligence, empathy and will - and two secondary attributes - size and
move.

These attributes are consistent across all settings and genres, and
always work in the same way, though the distribution of values may vary.
A fantasy setting with a rigid caste system will have few examples of
high attributes simply because of the small numbers of people, the lack
of formalised training and inability for gifted people to take up a role
befitting their ability. A science fiction setting with a population in
the trillions, where people are free to take the job they are best
suited for, will have more examples of gifted individuals which the PCs
will meet.

### Attribute Levels

For humans, attributes tend to range between two and five. Higher values
are possible, but rare. The following chart describes the different
levels from the point of view of an adult human. Non-human creatures may
work on different scales, especially for strength which tends to be much
higher for large animals.

Score

Attribute

You have no rateable ability in this attribute, and may not attempt
skills which use it.

You are crippled, being either very dumb, seriously ill or socially
inept.

You are noticeably below average, being in the bottom 10% of the
population. This is normally the minimum level of attribute it is
possible to have.

You are average, among the middle 80% of the population.

You are noticeably above average in ability, being in the top 10% of the
population.

You are highly adept at tasks related to this attribute. This is about
the highest that people will have naturally, without training.

You are truly exceptional, and have trained hard to develop your
attribute this high. Most people will find it very hard to compete
against you.

You are one of a small number of people in your country.

The normal maximum for humans. There may be a handful of people with an
attribute this high in the modern world.

Beyond what is naturally possible.

Non-humans will of course have different averages and ranges. Wild
beasts will tend to have a Perception of 5+, and large animals may well
have strengths of 10+.

Attributes are normally purchased during character generation with a
point buy system. See the Characters article for a particular setting
for an explanation of how this is done.

Whether an attribute can be increased after character generation depends
on both the setting and campaign style. Since YAGS tends to encourage a
more realistic view to advancement, attributes can take years of in-game
time to increase. Again, see a relevant Character article for your
setting.

### Primary Attributes

Strength measures a character\'s ability to hurt, break and lift things.
Some effects, such as how much you can carry, are based on the square of
your strength.

Health is a measure of endurance and fitness. Checks to remain alive
after being injured, resisting poison and avoiding fatigue are all based
on health.

Quickness and acrobatic ability are measured by agility. It is also used
for brawling, but not melee or missile weapons. Athletes, cat burglars
and martial artists require a good agility.

The dexterity of a character defines their hand-eye coordination,
sleight-of-hand, and skill with melee weapons, pistols, thrown weapons
and driving. Thieves, warriors and race car drivers need a good
dexterity.

Perception is a measure of general alertness and sensory ability. High
perception characters have good senses (vision, hearing) and
observational ability. Use of rifles and bows comes under Perception.

Intelligence is a measure of wit, cunning, memory and intuition.
Intelligence is used to know and remember things, to study and for
logic. Sages, researchers and scientists will use intelligence a lot.

Empathy is the ability to understand other people. A high empathy does
not necessarily make you charismatic, but a charismatic person will need
a high empathy in order to be able to react to and manipulate another\'s
emotions.

Strength of will is used to overcome base instincts, such as fear and
lust. If you have a high will, you are more resistant to magic, are less
gullible and tend to be a good liar, making it useful for con artists
and supernatural investigators.

Though all of these are useful in some settings, some may be more useful
in certain settings than others. Strength may be more useful in a
Fantasy setting than it is in a Science Fiction setting for example.

### Secondary Attributes

Secondary attributes aren\'t part of the standard set of eight
attributes, and do not tend to fall within the normal 2-5 range.

Size defaults to five for adult humans, with most adults ranging from
four to six. Size governs how much damage a creature can soak up. A blue
whale is about size 21. It cannot be raised with experience.

Soak is a measure of how well you can resist damage. It defaults to 12
for adult humans, and rarely changes.

Your move determines how quickly you can run, both in combat and over
long distance. It is equal to size + strength + agility + 1.

### Attributes in the Game World

The vast majority of humans will have an average attribute with a score
of 3. If you want to randomise an NPC\'s attributes, then roll a d20 for
each one. On a roll of 1-2, they have a score of 2, on a 19-20 they have
a score of 4. On any other result they have an average of 3. This means
that the average score accounts for about 80% of the population (though
most people will have at least one attribute that is non-average).

People such as Newton or Feynman would probably have an intelligence
score of eight. The best Olympic athletes in the modern world would
probably have similar scores for physical attributes. For humans, scores
above five are gained through lots of training and experience - they are
not gained due to a chance of birth alone.

## Skills

The most powerful drive in the ascent of man is his pleasure in his own
skill. He loves to do what he does well and, having done it well, he
loves to do it better.

A skill is something which can be learnt and improved through experience
and training. Except for a few basic skills, they always default to zero
unless specifically learnt. If a skill is zero, then it either can\'t be
used (in the case of many knowledge or science skills), can default to
another skill, or is rolled as a straight d20 halved (round down).

In some settings, it may be possible to learn skills almost immediately,
through cyborg implants or because the world is some sort of simulation.
It is highly suggested that skills above four are very difficult to
obtain in such a way.

### Skill Levels

Once a skill is learnt, it\'s level ranges from one upwards. There is no
theoretical limit to how high your skill can be, though a practical
limit is in the range of 10-15. Skills higher than 15 are considered to
be mythical - in the realm of supernatural or transcended beings.

High levels of skill allow you to purchase Techniques, which are
specialisations which enable you to perform tasks which are difficult or
impossible to do with just the basic skill.

#### Casual (1)

A skill of one represents very basic familiarity with a skill. Maybe you
took a single skiing lesson, or you spent a couple of weeks in Paris
picking up a bit of French.

#### Student (2-3)

If you have studied a skill in school or have had a reasonable amount of
practical experience, then you will have a score of two or three. You
can succeed at easy tasks without much difficulty, but you would
struggle if you had to use the skill in a professional job.

#### Professional (4-7)

Most professionals will have a skill of 4 or 5 in a skill. Many will
never go beyond this, since their skills will never be stretched,
however a few seasoned veterans will have obtained a level of 6 or 7.
Levels beyond this require a real dedicated attempt to further your
ability, rather than just simple experience.

#### Master (8-11)

A master level of skill reflects a true understanding of the skill, and
many years of dedicated study and training. Elite soldiers, leading
research scientists and renowned experts in a field would have a Master
level of skill.

Skill levels above 9 should be limited to named characters. A generic
squad of elite soldiers for example should be limited to skills of 9 or
less.

#### Legendary (12-15)

This level is about the highest that will be found in most worlds, and
such a score will only be had by the leaders in a field. Generally, such
people will have a good reputation, and will have many decades of
training and experience under their belt.

#### Mythical (16+)

Generally this will be the province of super heroes and other
supernatural creatures.

### Types of Skills

#### Talents

The skills available to characters will vary from genre to genre, but
YAGS has eight core skills, called talents, which all humans know to a
limited extent. Normally, all starting characters will have a score of 2
in each talent.

The eight talents are athletics; awareness; brawl; charm; guile;
sleight; stealth and throw. Since they are core to YAGS, they are
described in the next section, Core Skills. They represent basic skills
which everyone picks up in childhood, and many other skills will default
to a talent if they are not known.

#### Knowledges

Knowledges are skills which represent theoretical knowledge which must
be learnt. You can only make a check with a Knowledge skill if you
already have a score in it. You can not normally learn or practise
knowledges unless you have a source to study from.

The following guide gives an indication of what different skill levels
represent. Comparisons with the real world are difficult to do, and high
levels of knowledge are often best represented by specialisations by
using Techniques.

You\'ve seen a TV program on the subject, or listened to some stories.

You have a layman\'s interest in the subject, or studied it at school.
You will know the common stuff, but have gaps and lack depth and full
understanding.

You have a graduate\'s level of knowledge, and have a well rounded view
of the subject. This is sufficient for most people who use it regularly.

You have a level of knowledge equivalent to that of a Master\'s Degree.

If you have had a formal education, you probably have a Doctorate given
your level of knowledge.

This level of skill is held by masters in their field.

#### Languages

Language skills are treated on a scale from one to four, and are not
normally \'rolled\' like other skills. Instead, the level of skill gives
a guide to how much of a conversation a character can understand.

You can recognise the language and know a few words, but cannot put
sentences together.

You can understand and form basic sentences, and can get by in a market
or an inn, where the conversation is straightforward, and you can point
at things.

You have a good grasp of the language and can hold a decent
conversation. It is obviously not your first language however. You
probably have an accent, and many uncommon words will be beyond your
understanding.

You are fluent in the language. You will still have something of an
accent if you are a foreigner, but will not have problems communicating.
This is the default for a native speaker.

You can speak fluently without any accent, plus you have detailed
knowledge of various dialects and really obscure words.

Knowledge of a language may automatically include the ability to read
and write it as well. In some settings however (e.g. a medieval society)
this will not be the case. Higher levels of language skill than 5 are
possible, but will only be held by linguists who are studying the
language.

#### Standard skills

Standard skills are a mixture of knowledge, experience, physical
aptitude and common sense. If you have no score in a standard skill,
then it can still be used, however the roll (just a straight d20) is
halved, and a natural roll of 1 or 2 is considered a fumble.

### Skill Difficulties

When making an ability check, there are some common Target Numbers,
which are described in the following table. The descriptions assume an
average level of attribute - those with an above average attribute will
be able to get by with less skill.

Most tasks will be against a fixed TN. If you are competing against
another character, then they get a skill check with a modifier. The
modifier is given in parenthesis below, and adds to the other person\'s
check.

Type of Task

TN

Such a task can be achieved by a person with little or no skill with a
good chance of success. A professional will always succeed.

Anyone with a small amount of skill will be able to achieve this with a
good chance of success, though it will be difficult for someone without
any training at all.

Such tasks can be achieved without difficulty by a professional in ideal
conditions. Those without proper training can find it difficult however.

People with less than professional level of skill will find it hard to
succeed, and it is out of league of someone with only basic familiarity.

Such tasks require a highly skilled person. Anyone with less than
professional competence will always fail, and even professionals will be
hard pressed.

A master of the skill can achieve such tasks with confidence, others
will fail. About the highest level of difficulty under normal
circumstances.

A very difficult task under poor conditions.

Truly heroic.

Someone with superhuman level of skill will be hard pressed to achieve
this difficulty.

Well beyond what most people could achieve. Above average attributes are
required to have even a chance of success.

Tasks above Very difficult will be very rare, and often because of less
than perfect conditions, rather than the nature of the task itself.

Absurd tasks should be reserved for when a player tries something
totally heroic, which is at the very edge of possibility.

#### Degree of Success

If the skill check meets the target number, then a normal success is
assumed. If the roll was significantly above the target number, then the
success was particularly good. The exact result depends on the GM\'s
interpretation but the following can be used as a guide.

A good success is 10 points or more above the target. The task is
performed with style, completeness or speed.

An excellent success is 20 points or more above the target. It was
probably performed with two of style, completeness or speed.

A superb success is 30 points or more above the required target, and was
achieved with style, completeness and speed. Anything better than this
probably won\'t be noticed by an untrained witness.

A fantastic success is 40 points or more beyond the target.

Anything which is 50 points or more above the target number is amazing,
and represent as close to perfection as is possible to achieve.

### Skill Defaults

Some skills have a default - this will often be a Talent, but may be a
more generic skill or one which covers a similar or related subject. You
may choose to use a default skill instead of the real skill at any time.

Your total result (after the die roll) is halved.

Your fumble chance is doubled, or raised to one whichever is worse.

You are unable to make use of any techniques that you know.

Sometimes, using a default may also limit how you can use a skill. Using
Sleight to diffuse a bomb instead of a Demolitions skill is possible,
but you couldn\'t use it to know the type of bomb since that requires
specialist knowledge only granted by actually having the skill.

### Skill Pre-requisites

If a skill has a pre-requisite, then before the skill can be purchased
to level one, all pre-requisites must be met. Pre-requisites are always
another skill at the specified level.

Before you buy a skill at level one, you must purchase all pre-requisite
skills to the specified level.

A skill can never be more than double the level of any of its
pre-requisite skills.

You cannot put points into a skill if the next level of skill is not
allowed by your current pre-requisites.

### Limited Skills

If a skill is limited by another skill, then it cannot be more than half
the level of the skill it is limited by. Limited skills are rare, and
generally only present in settings where certain knowledges are either
very difficult, or in their infancy.

## Other Types of Tasks

### Long tasks

Sometimes a task is more suited to being resolved with multiple skill
checks. This is especially true for challenges which are time critical,
or which involve many days or weeks of work.

Such tasks have a TN as normal, but require a number of successes to be
achieved before the task is complete. For example, disabling a complex
trap may be TN 20/3, requiring 3 successes against a base TN of 20. You
can make multiple rolls, each roll taking a period of time. Every time
you succeed, you gain at least one level of success towards completion
(1 level on a moderate, 2 on a good success etc).

If a check fails, then no successes are gained towards completion, and
the fumble chance for all further checks increases by +1. Two failures
in a row result in complete failure, the effect of which are task
dependant. A fumble counts as a normal failure, and so increases the
fumble chance.

Unless stated otherwise, each attempt takes a round. For some tasks, the
time period might be anything from minutes to months.

### Competitive Tasks

Where two people are competing against each other and you don\'t want to
resolve it with a single skill check, then it is treated similar to a
long task, with both sides attempting to be the first to achieve a set
number of successes.

Each turn, both make a skill check and the winner gets to have the
advantage. On the subsequent turn if the winner already has the
advantage, then they win a success and lose their advantage. If the
loser has the advantage, then they simply lose it. Repeat until one side
gains enough successes.

If it is a physical task, then the loser may gain a point of fatigue to
prevent their opponent gaining a success. Their opponent does not lose
their advantage when this is done however.

An alternative to being the first to a certain number of successes can
be a set number of turns. Whoever has the most successes at the end
wins.

### Team Competitive Tasks

When teams of people are competing against each other (for example, in a
sport), then similar rules to standard competitive tasks are used. Each
turn, one person from each team is chosen to make the skill test. Each
time a person does so, they take a point of fatigue. This prevents one
person completely dominating the game and forces each team to share the
work.

The winner may be the first to a given number of success, or the most
successes after a set number of turns.

### Artistic Tasks

Artistic tasks include ballet, gymnastics, painting, singing, playing a
musical instrument or writing a book. You are not so much competing
against some challenge, but being compared to others.

A target of 10+ is something bearable, 20+ is something quite decent.
Make a single roll for something short, two for something of medium
length, and three or more for longer pieces of work. The overall quality
is the lowest roll. A full symphony or ballet performance might be five
rolls.

For every level of mastery that you have in the skill, you may make one
re-roll during the whole performance. You may re-roll a single check
more than once, and take the best roll each time.

If you are making five rolls for a ballet performance, and have 7 levels
of mastery, you could re-roll the first two twice, and the others once,
or any combination. You choose to re-roll or not after each roll.

## Practice

They say that practice makes perfect, and in YAGS skills definitely
progress over time. However, sometimes you want to practice not a skill,
but a particular task or routine with a level of dedication not normally
needed.

As a circus performer, you may want to practice a difficult acrobatic
routine to perfection. As a bank robber, you may want to mock up a full
scale replica of the bank and practice getting in and out. As a driver,
you may want to practice a particular race track in order to shave off
the last few tenths of a second.

Such practice montages are common in films, and also done in real life,
so YAGS allows short term bonuses for very specific tasks.

The bonus applies to what you practised, and what you practise must be
as close to what you will do on the day as possible. If it involves
breaking into a house by climbing over a flint wall, up a drain pipe,
jimmying open a window and picking the lock on the chest inside, then
practising by climbing a cliff and opening a different type of lock
isn\'t going to help.

If you practised everything perfectly, then on the day find that the
drainpipe has been removed, you still get the bonus for the flint wall,
opening the window and the lock, but have to make a standard athletics
check for climbing the wall of the house.

If the drainpipe is there, but it\'s wet and slippery due to rain (which
you hadn\'t practised on), then you can still have your bonus but you
can\'t consider that action to be non stressful).

### Quick Practice

If you have a few weeks, then each week you spend in practice gives you
a +1 bonus to any applicable skill checks you make on the day. If you
spend at least a week in practice, then you also have -1 to any fumble
chances for those checks (which will normally mean that you can\'t
fumble). More importantly, if you can\'t fumble, for anything where you
don\'t deviate from the plan, you may treat the situation as non
stressful without having to take extra time.

The practice must be continuous, and the bonus is good for a month after
you stop practising. The maximum bonus you can gain is +3.

### Long Practice

If you have longer than a few weeks, then each month that you spend in
practice grants you +1 to your skill (not roll) when performing the
routine, as well as -1 to any fumble chances. You may also consider
tasks within the planned routine to be non-stressful, without having to
spend more time.

The maximum bonus is equal to your skill, so you can\'t do better than
double your skill. A circus acrobat with a skill of 6 and an Agility of
4 would get an effective +4 to their roll for each month (+24 after 6
months)

It can be assumed that people who perform the same routine as part of
their job will gain this bonus over time.

For each month where you fail to practice, you lose one point of bonus.

## Techniques

A Technique is a specialisation of a skill, and may provide bonuses or
allow some particular special action to be attempted. A skill may have
several techniques associated with it, and some techniques can be used
with more than one skill. In the latter case, the technique only needs
to be purchased once - it can then be used with any skill which uses it,
as long as the skill is of sufficient level.

A technique has a cost associated with it, which is the number of
experience points which need to be spent to buy it. A level 6 technique
costs 6 points to buy. The cost of the technique is also the minimum
skill level that must be achieved before the technique can be purchased.
If you do not have the required skill at a sufficient level, then the
technique can\'t be bought.

Finally, a technique may have a prerequisite. These are the techniques
which must be known before this technique can be learnt.

Some techniques will be based on a skill group rather than a skill. In
this case the technique can be purchased when any skill in that group
reaches the technique\'s level, but it can only be used with those
skills of sufficient level.

:::: note
::: title
:::

Familiarities, Specialisations and Masteries add a layer of complexity
to the system but avoids having to need multiple different skills for
similar tasks. It would be possible to simply have a History skill, or a
Science skill, and ignore specialisations altogether.

However, this was viewed as being too unrealistic for the game.
Specialisations which allow you to buy a default skill which covers all
topic areas, and then just a few points in individual study areas seemed
like a suitable compromise.
::::

### Familiarity

Some skills require Familiarities, which are techniques of a fixed cost
for that skill. Such a skill always has a default familiarity, but will
list other familiarities which can be purchased.

For example, Driving assumes skill at driving a typical car, but has
familiarities for Motorbikes, HGVs, Tanks, Buggies and the like. If you
don\'t have the right familiarity, then you have to default to the
standard skill and your rolls are halved.

Most familiarities will be 2 points, though for complex skills they
might be 4 points.

### Specialisations

Many knowledge skills allow Specialisations. Normally, the TN of a
knowledge task is based on how specialised a bit of knowledge is.
Knowing when the Civil War started is a specific bit of knowledge from
late English history, so might be TN 30.

If you were specialised in English History or Military History, or 17th
Century then it becomes easier, maybe TN 20. For a specialisation in The
English Civil War, such a piece of knowledge is obvious.

Different specialisations will tend to focus the knowledge you do know.
Whilst a success with a English History specialisation will tell you
about the politics of the war, and what happened to Oliver Cromwell
after the war, a Military History specialisation will give you more
information about the battles fought.

There is no limit to how many specialisations you can have with a skill,
or how broad or narrow they can be.

### Masteries

Masteries are levelled specialisations, and are often used for
competitive or artistic skills. For tasks which have an artistic
component, they allow you to perform feats with grace, precision and
perfection. For competitive actions, they provide specialist training to
increasing levels of details. For example, Ballet and Gymnastics are
masteries based on Athletics. For Games, masteries can include Chess, Go
or Backgammon.

A Mastery has a base cost of 1 point, but can be bought up to any level
as per the normal limits for techniques. If you buy a Mastery at level
1, buying it at level 2 costs one extra point - you don\'t need to buy a
whole new technique.

Each level of mastery gives you a +1 bonus when attempting tasks related
to it.

In a competitive skill check where two characters are directly competing
against each other (e.g., in a game of chess, but not in an art
contest), if one person has a lower mastery level than the other, then
they suffer a +1 to their fumble chance per level of difference. If they
have no mastery levels, then the penalty is +2 per level of difference.
This represents the master\'s ability to force their opponent into bad
decisions, or take better advantage of the slightest mistake.

## Size

Start with the part where Jayne gets knocked out by a 90-pound girl,
\'cause\... I don\'t think that\'s ever getting old.

How large a creature is can be measured in a number of ways - height,
length and mass being the common criteria. In YAGS, the Size attribute
is a measure of the creature\'s capacity to absorb damage, and how easy
it is to hit. In general, the Size of a creature will increase
logarithmically with its mass - every +5 increase in Size represents a
ten fold increase in mass.

Adult humans range in Size from 4 (a small, slim woman) to 6 (a
heavyweight boxer or stereotypical Norse warrior). Anything other than
the default of 5 represents the extreme edge of human variation. The
biggest effect it has is to provide a little bit more (or less) capacity
to resist damage. The default character generation rules also put upper
and lower limits on Strength for noticeably large or small characters.

:::: note
::: title
:::

By using an exponential scale, the numbers are kept relatively small for
both Size and Strength for even the largest of creatures. If Size
wasn\'t exponential, a blue whale would need a Size of around 1000.
::::

The scale is based around an average of a 70kg human male. A Size 10
creature would be 700kg, a Size 15 creature 7 tonnes, and a Size 20
creature 70 tonnes. Some examples are as follows.

Size

Mass and examples

A large house cat.

1 year old child, a small dog (e.g., a beagle).

5 year old child.

10 year old child, a medium dog (e.g., a boxer).

Small adult, lightweight woman, a wolf.

Typical adult. This size constitutes most of the adult human population.
Anyone outside of this average is very noticeably large or small.

Heavyweight boxer, stereotypical barbarian warrior.

Donkey, black bear.

Lion.

Riding horse, grizzly bear.

War horse, prehistoric cave bear. Also, a family car.

Rhino. Also, an SUV or small tank.

Great white shark, anything up to about 2 tonnes in mass. Also, a
typical tank.

Triceratops. Also, a large tank.

Elephant.

Apatosaurus. The largest land animals known.

Blue whale.

Each point of Size allows a creature (including PCs) to take one wound
before dying. A warhorse can take about twice as much damage as a man,
an elephant about 3 times. The details are a bit more complex (small
weapons have less effect on large targets) however, and a full
description of how wounds and damage works is left for the Combat
article.

Vehicles and other constructs are actually treated a little differently
from creatures, in that their Size is actually based on the volume of
the vehicle, rather than its mass. Obtaining real-world figures for the
mass of animals is quite simple, but volumes are rarely given. Finding
the volume of a vehicle or building is relatively straightforward, but
finding a sensible value for its mass can be hard (especially when a
vehicle\'s mass can change drastically depending on whether it is empty
or loaded). However, creatures and vehicles should approximate to the
same Size for any given size. A Size 5 vehicle is assumed to be one
cubic metre, again increasing by a factor of 10 for each +5.

To get an idea of how large vehicles and objects scale, the following
examples may help.

Size

Vehicle examples

The ability to absorb damage is also slightly different for vehicles, in
that weapons designed to harm people are far less effective against
vehicles, but again this is described elsewhere in the High Tech
article.

### Tiny Creatures

Though YAGS bottoms out at Size zero, there are plenty of creatures
smaller than this (actually, the majority of creatures are significantly
smaller, but very few are interesting from a story point of view).

A Tiny creature is one tenth the mass of a Size 0 creature. Each extra
level of Tiny reduces the mass a further tenfold. Tiny creatures are
automatically killed if successfully hit by a creature of larger Size.
If it is important, each level of Tiny gives Size -5.

Every level of Tiny adds +5 to the TN to hit the target in melee. For
missile combat, take the worst of +5 or doubling the range penalty per
level. See the Bestiary article for a full description of tiny
creatures.

## Movement

How far and fast you (or any creature in YAGS) can move depends on your
attributes, skill and how much you are carrying. There are two types of
movement - combat movement which covers short distances over a period of
a few seconds, and overland movement which covers walking, hiking or
running for minutes or hours at a time.

Your basic Move score is equal to your Size + Strength + Agility + 1,
which is 12 for a typical adult human.

### Combat Move

A character can move a distance in metres equal to half their Move score
(round down) each round of combat without any penalty. For an average
person, this is 6m/round. This is normally considered a free action.

#### Running

A character can run at their full move each round. For an average human,
this is 12m/round. This is effectively a light jog, and can be kept up
over long distance. Moving this far in combat counts as an action, and
restricts what else the character can do - see the combat article for
full details.

If running for a long time, the character will gain one point of fatigue
every Athletics minutes. A character with a Health of 3 and an athletics
of 2, will gain one point of fatigue every 6 minutes.

Each level of fatigue reduces base movement by 2 (and also reduces
combat move by 1). If you reach Exhausted, then any form of movement is
considered a full action (you cannot attack, defend or do anything else
that round) and you cannot run or sprint.

#### Sprinting

A character can sprint at a speed equal to twice their Move score plus
their athletics score each round. For a typical adult with a move of 12
and an athletics score of 2, this would be 26m/round. Basically, a
person could run the 100m in just under 20s.

A modern Olympic athlete, with an Agility of 8 and a Strength of 4 has a
Move of 18. Assuming an athletics of 15, they can sprint at 51m/round,
which is pretty close to the current world record.

A sprinting character gains a point of fatigue every round. All fatigue,
wound and stun penalties reduce total movement when sprinting.

### Overland Movement

If you don\'t know where you are going, any road will get you there.

Overland movement is where round to round movement isn\'t important, but
distance travelled over the course of an entire day is. A day is divided
into six watches of 4 hours each.

In good conditions over average terrain, a character can be expected to
travel a distance in kilometres equal to their move score each watch.
This equates to about 3km/h. A character will gain one level of
exhaustion each watch when moving at this speed. If a character is
riding a horse (or similar creature), then they gain exhaustion every
other watch.

Modifiers to this (weather, type of terrain etc) are possible, but
aren\'t described here. See the wilderness article for full details.

### Encumbrance

The amount that a character can carry increases according to the square
of their strength, and the load they are carrying is measured in
kilogrammes. Any rule that requires a character to be Unencumbered must
be carrying less than their Strength in load.

Effects

Load

A character carrying up to their Strength is considered to be completely
unencumbered, and never suffers penalties.

A character carrying more than their Strength, is lightly encumbered.
They are only at penalties in certain weight critical situations (such
as swimming).

A character carrying up to twice the square of their Strength is at -1
to Agility. They are also unable to sprint.

The character has a -2 penalty to Agility, -1 to Dexterity, and cannot
run or sprint. Their base movement is halved.

A greatly encumbered character suffers a -4 penalty to Agility and -2 to
Dexterity, and cannot run or sprint. Their base movement is halved.

Character cannot move, all agility checks are automatically zero and -2
to dexterity.

Each level of encumbrance gives a character a -5 penalty to all rolls to
resist fatigue. A character always has a minimum move of 1, until they
become over encumbered. Agility and dexterity can never be reduced below
zero. If reduced to zero, then a character can still make agility and
dexterity checks, just at zero ability.

Armour and other clothing may have a load which is different to its
weight. In which case, use the load value when wearing the armour. It
will often be lower due to being designed to be worn comfortably.

# Core Skills

There are eight core skills in YAGS, which are called Talents. These are
known by virtually all characters (at least, human ones), since they
represent basic ability. These skills are described in the general skill
lists, but what follows is a very detailed look at how these skills can
be used.

It should be noted that the following is rules heavy, and in some cases
may be best use as guidelines rather than hard and fast rules (even more
so than normal). A lot of what is described are core activities - such
as running, fast talking, spotting things and the like.

When looking at skill difficulties, it should be remembered that for
these skills, the majority of people will have an ability of 6 (3 x 2) -
an average roll of 17. A skill check of moderate TN will be failed 65%
of the time.

## Athletics

We call ourselves runners. We exist on the edge between the gloss and
the reality. The mirror\'s edge.

Racing down an ally, leaping from roof top to roof top, climbing rapidly
up walls or swinging across chasms on ropes - these are all tasks for
which the Athletics skill is vital. It covers a wide range of athletic,
acrobatic and gymnastic feats, including running, swimming, jumping and
climbing. It can provide bonuses in combat, but only if you specialise
in certain acrobatic styles of fighting.

### Running

Generally, if you want to run then you don\'t need to make a skill
check. However, sometimes life has a habit of throwing obstacles in your
path which can end up testing your skill to the limit. How fast you can
run is based on your Move score, and is recapped below.

Action

Distance/round

Racing across clear terrain with nothing in your way is considered
trivial, and you don\'t need to make a skill check to succeed. On the
other hand, trying to dodge through crowds of people on a broken and icy
footpath can require a lot of skill and luck. If the path is not clear
and easy, then an athletics check is needed each round. The TN is
modified by how fast you are moving - halved if moving carefully,
doubled if running and tripled if sprinting.

Target

Obstruction

No obstructions, a completely clear path.

A typical lightly crowded street, or through a wood. Running is easy,
unless you fumble and trip up.

A busy street, a warehouse full of crates, across rubble or through
dense woods.

A busy market, or through thick foliage.

Unstable footing, such as rubble, crumbling rock or swaying rigging.

Narrow or uneven footing, such as a narrow ledge or ground with many
holes or cracks.

Additionally to the other modifiers, if the surface is icy, oil covered
or otherwise lacking in grip.

If any of the other modifiers apply, and it is windy, add a further +5.

Racing across rooftops might count as light obstruction (5) to avoid
chimneys and aerials, with +5 for unstable (roof tiles will likely
break) and +5 for uneven footing, for a total of 15. This goes up to 30
if you run, 45 if you sprint. If you need to jump gaps between roof
tops, then this counts as extra obstructions.

If you fail, you make no progress that round. If falling could be
dangerous, make a second check at the same TN - failure again means that
you fall and suffer the consequences. You can choose to succeed either
failed check by gaining a point of Fatigue, as long as success was
possible in the first place.

### Climbing

Whenever you must climb a complex obstacle, an Athletics check is
required. Unless you are trying to perform the feat quickly, climbing a
ladder or flight of stairs will rarely require a skill check.

During combat, a simple climb manoeuvre can be performed as part of a
move action by making an Athletics check.

Target

Obstruction

Get onto or over a chair or bench. Getting under a table or similar
shelter is also very easy.

Get onto a table or object of similar height. Climbing under and through
a table, assuming there are no chairs in the way.

Climb/jump over a table or object of similar size. Also, climbing over a
fence no higher than you are.

On success, all of these can be performed as a standard movement action
at no penalty during combat. Failure results in no or partial movement,
and loss of further attacks and defences that round.

To perform these actions as a full round action, halve the difficulties.

#### Long climbs

When climbing things which require more than a round to complete, the TN
is more based on the complexity of the task than the time it takes to
complete.

Normally, you can speed climb a distance equal to quarter your Move each
round. Make a Athletics check each round, failure means no distance is
climbed, and make an Athletics check at the same TN or fall.
Alternatively, the second check can be ignored if you take a level of
Fatigue.

Optionally, you can move ten times this distance every minute, making a
check each minute. This is slower, but reduces the number of rolls and
hence the chance of fumbling.

For longer climbs, a roll every 15 minutes can be made, at Move x 50.
Again, speed is traded for reliability. Over these distances, a failure
can be ignored by gaining a level of Exhaustion.

Target

Surface being climbed

Ladders, very easy slope or tree.

Trees with plenty of branches, cliff with lots of ledges and handholds,
scaffolding or similar structure.

Typical cliff, on to the roof of a modern detached house (via garage,
drain pipes etc).

Smooth cliff or brick wall of a modern house.

About the hardest most cliffs will be in general, though they may have
sections which are harder than this.

About the hardest naturally occurring climbs.

If you want to climb carefully, halve speed, and on failure half the TN
of the second check (the first check is still the same however).

## Awareness

To begin with, our perception of the world is deformed, incomplete. Then
our memory is selective. Finally, writing transforms.

If your Perception is your ability to see or hear things, then Awareness
is your ability to notice that you have. A person with a high Awareness
doesn\'t have better eyesight, but they are better at taking note of
their surroundings. As such, it may be combined with Intelligence to
remember what you previously may have seen or heard.

Often, it will be used for noticing things that are in plain site, such
as searching a scene for clues or noticing something out of the
ordinary. In these cases, make a Awareness check at one of the following
difficulties.

Target

Example

Notice something obvious, such as a knife laying next to a dead body.

Something in plain sight, but not immediately obvious. A torn note on a
desk, a wet pair of shoes on someone who hasn\'t been outside.

To spot something, make a Awareness check according to the table below.

Modifier

Situation

Base TN to see a person who is standing in the open, making no attempt
to hide themselves.

If the target is over 50m away, then increase the TN by +5.

If the target is 100m away or more, then increase the TN by +10. Each
doubling (200m, 400m) adds a further +10.

Each point of size of the target above 5, reduce the TN by 5. If they
are smaller, then increase the TN by 5 per point.

If the target is hidden in half cover.

If the target is almost entirely hidden.

## Brawl

This is the default skill for all forms of melee combat, but is mostly
concerned with combat involving either no weapons, or small or
improvised weapons such as knives, bottles, chairs and clubs.

Brawl includes punching, kicking, dodging, wrestling, biting, grapples
and throws. By default, there are no \'martial art\' skills in YAGS -
instead particular fighting styles are modelled as techniques (based on
brawl) which grant special abilities or bonuses.

Brawling is covered in detail in the combat article, so is not described
in depth here.

## Charm

Charm is a way of getting the answer yes without asking a clear
question.

Charm is your ability to make friends and influence people, and includes
such things as small talk, flirting, telling jokes or simply being nice.
Charm is generally based on Empathy. It does not have to be sincere, but
is generally about getting another person to like you.

If you wish to impress someone, make a Charm check, and your result will
determine what they think of you. Charm\'s big advantage is that it
isn\'t resisted

Target

Reaction

You manage to annoy or upset the person such that they dislike you. They
are unlikely to help you, and may hinder you depending on their
personality.

You haven\'t upset them, but you haven\'t impressed them either. Whether
they help or hinder you will depend on their personality.

You made a good impression, and the person has had their opinion of you
improved. They will probably be willing to help you, or spend time in
your company, as long as it doesn\'t cost them too much.

You have really impressed them, and they will make an effort to aid you,
or to keep you happy. It requires a few minutes of chat for someone to
be Impressed by you.

They are taken with you, and will go out of their way to try and help
you, even if it involves effort on their part. This requires up to an
hour of your time to awe someone like this.

You have made a deep connection with the person, and they will try their
best to impress you and make sure that you return their affection. An
evening.

You have the person eating out of your hand. They will do anything for
you. A few evenings.

The above results are the best first impression possible, and assumes
that the person didn\'t know anything about you before hand. If you are
a hated enemy, or have just done something they consider unpleasant,
then they may start with a reaction of -1 or worse. If you have any
modifiers for good (or bad) appearance, status or reputation then these
may modify your Empathy for this roll.

How much time is spent making that first impression also limits how good
the result can be. A quick introduction won\'t get you better than a
Liked result, whatever the roll.

The better the impression you make, the more likely the other person is
to like you, however even a Love result won\'t cause them to give you
all their wealth (at least, not immediately).

## Guile

If one is to be called a liar, one may as well make an effort to deserve
the name.

The purpose of Guile is to deceive others, whether it is by direct lying
or misdirection. Guile is also used to determine if others are lying. It
uses a wide variety of attributes, depending on what you are attempting
to do.

### Simple lies

Simple lying requires a guile check against the opponent\'s guile. It
basically entails keeping calm, not saying more than you should and not
showing your true emotions.

This assumes that you are trying to keep things simple, and restricting
the information you are providing.

Obviously, if you wish to tell if someone is lying, then you make the
Empathy check, and they make the Will check. If you exceed their roll,
then you know if they are lying or telling the truth. If you fail, then
you will randomly think they are being truthful or liars. If the
target\'s roll was positive, you think they are truthful, otherwise you
think they are lying. Neither party knows whether they succeeded or not.

On a good success, you are certain whether the other person is lying or
not. However, if the liar gets a good success, then you are certain they
are telling the truth so this doesn\'t necessarily help.

### Interrogation

Interrogation is more about trying to catch the other person out with
logic and evidence, and countering it requires quick thinking. In this
case, both sides make a contest of guile.

## Sleight

No performer should attempt to bite off red-hot iron unless he has a
good set of teeth.

Whether you are performing card tricks, picking pockets or entertaining
people with your amazing juggling skills, sleight of hand can be a
useful skill to have. It is a mixture of reflexes, control and
distraction, so though it is Dexterity based, it may be aided with the
use of Empathy.

### Pick Pocket

If trying to steal an item from a person without them noticing, then a
Sleight check is required, against the target\'s Awareness. Modifiers
depend on the type of situation.

Bonus

Situation

A busy and crowded environment, such as the tube during rush hour or
around a busy market stand.

A crowded street, full of distractions but where physical contact
between people is fleeting.

### Legerdemain

If you wish to perform simple conjuring tricks then use Sleight. Your
check is against a static target number to pull the trick off with
success - 20 for a simple coin palming trick, 30 for something more
complex.

A Awareness check by an observer against your skill roll will enable
them to see how you did the trick. If you are simply trying to
entertain, then this doesn\'t necessarily mean you failed.

## Stealth

Hey pal. If you\'re goin\' to make that much noise, why don\'t you just
come on out?

Moving silently past guards, hiding in the shadows or otherwise trying
to avoid being seen all comes under Stealth.

To find a place to hide, you use Perception. To move quietly, you use
Agility. If in doubt and both are required, make a single check with
Agility.

A Stealth check opposes the Awareness of the person you are trying to
avoid, and the observer\'s roll is modified according to distance and
situation.

## Throw

Don\'t throw those bloody spears at me.

Hurling a spear into your enemy, chucking a grenade through a doorway,
catching a ball or juggling several all come under the Throw skill.

Throw is generally based on Dexterity. If throwing at someone, then
it\'s considered an attack and they may get a dodge plus the TN will be
modified by range (+1 per metre for typical objects). A doorway is about
TN 10 to throw something through, a window 15, a car window about 20.

Catching something like a ball, which was thrown to you, is about 10,
modified by +2 for each point the thrower missed you by on their attempt
to throw.

# Genres and Settings

## Technology

Some things are limited by the type of technology available. Limits
affect both equipment that can be purchased, and also what skills can be
learnt. In some cases, a skill may exist in different time periods, but
be used quite differently.

### Tech Levels

The level of technology of a culture is roughly determined by its Tech
Level, which ranges from TL 0 (the stone age) through to TL 8 (modern
day) and beyond. This is a crude method of determining a culture\'s
technological capability, but is meant to be quick and simple.

#### 0: Stone Age

Pre-technological civilisation with the barest minimum of sticks and
stones, as well as knowledge of fire. Culture, language and possibly
religion will arise at some point during TL 0.

#### 1: Bronze Age

The ability to work metals. The civilisations of the \'Ancients\',
covering several thousand years. Includes the Greeks, Celts, Egyptians
and other cultures.

#### 2: Iron Age

The ability to work iron and stone. Many iron age cultures were also
seafarers. The early Roman period and the post-Roman (Dark Ages) period.

#### 3: Medieval (1000-1450)

Steel, heavy cavalry and early experimentation with gunpowder mark TL 3.
In Europe, TL 3 was the age of castles and knights, monasteries and
books, as well as the rise of the feudal system and early glimmerings of
science. The Romans were pretty much at TL 3 as well.

#### 4: Renaissance (1450-1750)

The Age of Reason and the Enlightenment mark the dawn of science, though
it doesn\'t really reach full bloom until TL 5. Gunpowder, sailing
ships, astronomy and mathematics all make their mark on the world.

#### 5: Steam (1750-1900)

In this period the secrets of the universe begin to unravel, with the
Industrial Revolution transforming society and science transforming the
way we try to understand the world. What are to become the basic
foundations of chemistry (the periodic table), biology (evolution) and
physics (electricity, magnetism and atomic theory) are worked out during
TL 5.

#### 6: Mechanical (1900-1945)

This is the start of the Modern age, with mass production beginning to
take over from manual labour, the mechanisation of warfare and
ultimately a full understanding of the power of the atom.

The generic character generation rules for YAGS work from TL 6 onwards.
Before this, many of the academic and scientific skills require
re-working.

#### 7: Nuclear (1945-1980)

Many TL 7 inventions actually came about at the end of TL 6, with the
jet engine, nuclear bomb and computers. In TL 7 these things become
mainstream. Electronics and medicine really start to revolutionise
society, and the beginnings of space exploration. It wasn\'t until TL 7
(1972 to be precise) that anyone knew what the Earth looked like.

#### 8: Information (1980-2020)

At the time of writing, this is the present day.

#### 9+: The Future (2020+)

TL 9 and beyond represent science fiction, so exactly what technology is
available will depend greatly on the background being modelled.

By default, TL 9 is assumed to be relatively hard SF. Miniaturisation of
computers, greater capability of phones, human cloning and genetic
screening and more compact power sources are probably the main areas of
improvement.

Nano-technology will be used in material construction and medicine but
not much beyond that, and there may be more space based development. TL
9 will go on to at least 2050, maybe 2100 depending on the pace of
development. Technology beyond that is impossible to predict.

### Future History

Technology levels of 9+ will be very campaign dependant. Generally, 9 -
10 can be viewed as Cyberpunk style of science fiction, with limited
space travel and most stories happening on Earth.

From 10 to 12 might cover early interstellar travel, depending on how
difficult it is in the setting. Human societies in SF like Babylon 5,
Blakes 7 or the Honor Harrington series would be of this level.

TL 13 - 15 starts to see super-science based societies, with massive
orbital structures and weapons capable of devastating planetary
civilisations.

# GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE {#gpl}

Version 2, June 1991

Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 675 Mass Ave,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.

## Preamble

The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to
share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public License is
intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software\--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This
General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation\'s software and to any other program whose authors commit to
using it. (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by
the GNU Library General Public License instead.) You can apply it to
your programs, too.

When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price.
Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the
freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this
service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone
to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights. These
restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis
or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have.
You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.
And you must show them these terms so they know their rights.

We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

Also, for each author\'s protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software. If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors\' reputations.

Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents.
We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free program will
individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the program
proprietary. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must
be licensed for everyone\'s free use or not licensed at all.

The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

## GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

0\. This License applies to any program or other work which contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed under
the terms of this General Public License. The \"Program\", below, refers
to any such program or work, and a \"work based on the Program\" means
either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law: that is
to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it, either
verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another language.
(Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term
\"modification\".) Each licensee is addressed as \"you\".

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of running
the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program is
covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Program
(independent of having been made by running the Program). Whether that
is true depends on what the Program does.

1\. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program\'s source
code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously
and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice
and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to
this License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any other
recipients of the Program a copy of this License along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

2\. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion of
it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and distribute
such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1 above, provided
that you also meet all of these conditions:

a\) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating
that you changed the files and the date of any change.

b\) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any part
thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third parties
under the terms of this License.

c\) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively when
run, you must cause it, when started running for such interactive use in
the most ordinary way, to print or display an announcement including an
appropriate copyright notice and a notice that there is no warranty (or
else, saying that you provide a warranty) and that users may
redistribute the program under these conditions, and telling the user
how to view a copy of this License. (Exception: if the Program itself is
interactive but does not normally print such an announcement, your work
based on the Program is not required to print an announcement.)

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program, and
can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based on
the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this
License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire
whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of a
storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under the
scope of this License.

3\. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

a\) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source
code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2
above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

b\) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three years,
to give any third party, for a charge no more than your cost of
physically performing source distribution, a complete machine-readable
copy of the corresponding source code, to be distributed under the terms
of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software
interchange; or,

c\) Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer to
distribute corresponding source code. (This alternative is allowed only
for noncommercial distribution and only if you received the program in
object code or executable form with such an offer, in accord with
Subsection b above.)

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it. For an executable work, complete source code
means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control
compilation and installation of the executable. However, as a special
exception, the source code distributed need not include anything that is
normally distributed (in either source or binary form) with the major
components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on
which the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the
executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering access
to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent access to copy
the source code from the same place counts as distribution of the source
code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source
along with the object code.

4\. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise
to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties
who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will
not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in
full compliance.

5\. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works. These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and all
its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the
Program or works based on it.

6\. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions
on the recipients\' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not
responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to this License.

7\. If, as a consequence of a court judgement or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute
so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this License and
any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not
distribute the Program at all. For example, if a patent license would
not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by all those who
receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then the only way you
could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely from
distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is implemented
by public license practices. Many people have made generous
contributions to the wide range of software distributed through that
system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to
the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute
software through any other system and a licensee cannot impose that
choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be
a consequence of the rest of this License.

8\. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License may
add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those
countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among countries
not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates the
limitation as if written in the body of this License.

9\. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and \"any
later version\", you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that version or of any later version published by
the Free Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published by the
Free Software Foundation.

10\. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the
author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the
Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we
sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the
two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free
software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

NO WARRANTY

11\. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO
WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.
EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR
OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM \"AS IS\" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE
PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE
COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

12\. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY
AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM
(INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED
INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF
THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR
OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
