YAGS 0.7.9

Guns and other things that go bang, through the ages.

Samuel Penn

sam@glendale.org.uk

2016

Samuel Penn

This document can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of
the GNU Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation
version 2.

# The Technological Revolution

I never thought that I would ever be wealthy enough to own a car - nor
so poor that I wouldn't have servants.

Through a process that began in the 17th century, and began to
accelerate in the 19th, the 20th century saw a huge increase in the rate
of technological advancement that made massive changes to the way people
lived within a single generation. The early 20th century saw the first
air planes, the mechanisation of warfare, the mass production of cars
and instantaneous long distance communication coming into the hands of
the masses.

YAGS High Tech covers the equipment available during the period from the
early 20th century (Technology Level 6) through to the early 21st
century (TL 8). Though it is barely more than 100 years, there is a huge
change in the type of items available. However, they are all close
enough to the present to be considered Modern, and for most people to
have a vague understanding of what these periods in history were like.

High Tech concerns itself mostly with those things that require in-game
statistics, such as weapons and vehicles. Since vehicles become so
predominant during these periods, a detailed set of rules on the use of
vehicles within YAGS are also included.

## The Modern World (1900 - 2020)

The technology levels in YAGS are meant as a rough guide as to when an
item, skill or knowledge becomes available for use within the game. The
date ranges given are based on 'Western Civilisation', and there is
always a certain fuzziness around the transition from one period to the
next.

Though Europe and North America are currently TL 8, there are still TL 0
(stone age) civilisations in the world, and many smaller countries might
still be classed as TL 7, or even TL 6. In many games, it may well be
that the adventures are happening in these less technologically advanced
countries, so though PCs have access to high tech weapons and satellite
phones, the culture around them has a combination of spears and AK-47s.

The technology level defines the base level of technology that a culture
can support itself, and may be radically different from the technology
actually available. There are many African nations where mobile phones
are a common means of communicating and where farmers regularly look up
grain prices on the internet, but the TL of the culture itself may be 2
or 3. Just because they don't have the knowledge to build a steam
engine, doesn't mean they can't make use of (or even know how to
repair) high tech equipment purchased from others.

Where prices are given, they are given for the TL when the item was
introduced. Most items will reduce in price at later TLs, though if they
become generally unavailable then prices may well increase.

Prices are given in USD (\$), again at time of introduction.

### TL 6 - The Mechanical Age

You can't say that civilization don't advance, however, for in every
war they kill you in a new way.

Covering the period from 1900 to 1945, TL 6 sees the introduction of
cars and planes on a scale which affects the lives of everyone.

From the point of view of being the setting for a campaign, TL 6 has a
number of unique advantages. Firstly, it has just the right amount of
technology to allow things to be possible, without it being quite
prevalent enough to close down other options.

Communication around the world is possible, but possible to prevent on a
regular basis without stretching disbelief. Fast air travel exists, but
is limited. In America, you have the extremes of high society and abject
poverty rubbing shoulders with each other. Two world wars provide plenty
of plot hooks, and the '30s provide obvious villains in the form of the
Nazis.

#### Supporting a TL 6 Culture

In a science fiction setting, it is relatively easy for a culture to
achieve TL 6 if they are pre-equipped with the right scientific
knowledge. As long as skilled craftsman are available, the machines that
were common in this period didn't require high levels of automation for
production, and could be produced manually.

There were no sensitive electronic components needing to be manufactured
in expensive clean rooms, no high precision tools for crafting micro
technology, and no required knowledge of advanced physics or medicine.

As such, many off world colonies may well be able to support a TL 6
culture with a relatively low population. They would rely on trade with
more populous worlds to obtain more advanced tools, medicine and
machines.

### TL 7 - The Nuclear Age

Now, I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds.

The first atomic bomb was detonated in 1945, and signifies the start of
TL 7. Atomic energy was not the only defining characteristic of TL 7
however. Space travel, computers and the wide adoption of television
also changed culture considerably.

TL 7 provides a number of good possibilities for a campaign, the most
obvious of which is the Cold War. There is plenty of opportunity for
adventures set around espionage, covert operations and outright shooting
wars. The end of the Cold War period actually made it a lot harder to
come up with believable plots for action films.

The huge expenditure of the Cold War, on both sides of the Iron Curtain,
saw rapid advancement in the state of military equipment. Most of the
major conflicts of the period though were between imbalanced armies and
demonstrated that having the best hardware wasn't the only requirement
to win a war quickly.

### TL 8 - The Information Age

I'm a great believer that any tool that enhances communication has
profound effects in terms of how people can learn from each other, and
how they can achieve the kind of freedoms that they're interested in.

The Science Fiction of TL 7 saw computers as becoming bigger and more
powerful, but mostly failed to predict them becoming smaller and
cheaper. The early dreams of a telephone in every American town, or a
computer in every home, ended up missing the mark by being too
conservative.

With the end of the Cold War in the late 80s, it seemed that the West
had run out of enemies to fight. It wasn't long before new enemies were
found, and by the early 21st century there is again room for plenty of
covert operations, though the nature of such things has changed
drastically since TL 7.

The big issue with TL 8 adventures is that communication and information
is ubiquitous. Unless characters are adventuring in remote parts of
Africa or South America, it's difficult to be out of range of a mobile
signal, Google, Wikipedia and the answer to whatever problem is
currently confusing you.

#### Supporting a TL 8 Culture

The level of technology prevalent in TL 8 requires a supporting
infrastructure not easily obtained without a large population, in the
order of 100 million people. It requires raw materials, advanced
factories, precision machines and the ability to produce sensitive
electronic components on a huge scale.

Also required is a good understanding of science, at a level beyond what
most people are willing to be capable of. This requires a good education
system, and the ability to support academia.

Some technology however is easy to share with low tech neighbours.
Mobile phones are ubiquitous almost throughout the entire world, even in
cultures which are barely above TL 0. AK-47s are cheap and easy to use,
and have become the staple of tribal warfare. As technology advances
though, it becomes harder to support it without the full set of tools. A
TL 7 car can be fixed and maintained by someone with a hammer and a bit
of knowledge. Fixing the computer controlled electronics of a modern TL
8 car however is going to be much harder.

# Ageing and Health

I don't want to achieve immortality through my work; I want to achieve
immortality though not dying. I don't want to live on in the hearts of
my countrymen; I want to live on in my apartment.

Sooner or later, everybody dies. As an 'adventuring hero' you will
probably die on your feet attempting to do something heroic. Most people
die in their beds of old age. On the off chance that you survive to old
age, YAGS has some rules on what happens to you at this point.

Once you reach 30, you need to make an ageing roll each year. This roll
can be done on your birthday, or at the end of the winter season. For
long running campaigns which are built around yearly events, it is
generally easiest to assume that everyone rolls at the same time of
year. The results of the ageing will happen sometime over the following
year.

## Ageing Rolls

An ageing roll is equal to 1d20 + the number of full decades you have
lived. On your 30th through 39th year, you will roll 1d20 + 3. There are
modifiers to this based on your current state of health and living
conditions.

Condition

Modifier

Each year, at the end of the year, roll a d20 + number of full decades +
modifiers + decrepitude. Decrepitude is a modifier you gain from ageing.

Roll

Effect

## Sickness

Sickness covers all forms of physical conditions that aren't simple
damage. It can include disease, infections and radiation sickness. A
sickness provides a penalty to actions similar to wounds or fatigue, but
has its own track.

# Hazards

The various reasons which we have enumerated lead us to believe that the
new radioactive substance contains a new element which we propose to
give the name of radium.

The world is a dangerous place, which is often trying to find new ways
of killing us, or at least making life more exciting. It is during the
High Tech era that we began to discover and understand some of these new
ways, from radiation sickness to nerve poisons and biological warfare.

## Radiation

Radiation begins to be understood at the start of TL 6, though it is not
until the end of TL 6, with the dropping of the first atomic bombs, that
the full horrors of radiation become understood by the population at
large. During the early years of the 20th century it was actually
believed that radiation was good for you, and radioactive drinks were
marketed as a health benefit.

There are many ways to measure radiation, the most common being the Gray
and the Sievert. These are not simply different units, but different
ways of measuring radiation so there isn't a direct conversion factor
between them. For simplicity, YAGS uses a Radiation Dose score for
someone who has been exposed to radiation, which amalgamates all these
different ways. This starts at zero, and fatality can occur around 100.

There are two effects of a radiation dose - acute and chronic. Acute
effects are suffered if the dosage is received in a short space of
time - seconds or minutes. Generally only high levels of radiation
exposure (e.g., an exposed reactor core) will cause acute effects.
Chronic effects will show up months or years later.

### Getting Irradiated

If you are irradiated, then you will gain a Radiation Dose score which
will build up each time you suffer further radiation exposure. Minor
exposure may have little or no short term effect, but over time can lead
to death from organ failure, cancers or other long term health symptoms.

If you are exposed to a radiation source, then make a roll on the
following chart to see how much Radiation you gain. The strength of the
source will range from mild to critical.

  
  d20       Mild      Light     Moderate    Heavy     Serious   Critical
  --- --- --- ----- --- --- ----
  1-4       \-        \-        2           4         8         20

  5-8       \-        1         3           6         12        30

  9-12      1         2         5           10        20        50

  13-16     2         3         7           15        30        75

  17-20     3         5         10          20        40        100
  

  : Acute Radiation

How serious these dosages are depend on how quickly you receive them.
Gained over a long period of time (such as by living in a radioactive
wasteland) they are likely to cause cancer, killing you in decades. The
same dose over a few minutes can lead to acute radiation syndrome, which
can kill you in days.

#### Example Chronic Doses

Living in radioactive wilderness, such as around Pripyat.

Living in radioactive hot spots around Pripyat.

Living in radioactive wilderness, such as around Pripyat within a year
of the Chenobyl accident.

#### Example Acute Doses

Chenobyl reactor core.

Outside during fallout from nuclear explosion.

#### Radiation Sickness

Radiation Sickness is a form of Sickness (see previous chapter) that is
contracted from exposure to radiation. Each level gives you a penalty to
all actions (both physical and mental), and also makes it harder to
heal.

### Acute Radiation Effects

Very rarely, you may be submitted to highly intense doses of radiation
in a very short period of time, over minutes or less. As well as causing
the Radiation Sickness effects described later, it can have an effect
over a period of Rounds or Minutes.

#### Radiation Burns

If you receive a Radiation Dose of 100 or more in a single round, then
you immediately take one level of Mixed damage from burns and tissue
damage per full 100 points of Dose.

At this point you're pretty much dead anyway, it's just a question of
how quickly and painfully you die.

#### Immediate Symptoms

If you receive a Radiation Dose of 5 or more in a single hour then you
need to make a Health check or suffer the effects listed below. Make a
single Health check for all of the effects, and suffer any that apply.

##### Radiation Sickness (5+)

Health check to avoid: Twice Dose

Radiation Sickness is a sickness that manifests as nausea, vomiting and
diarrhoea Health hours after receiving the Dose.

You receive one level of Radiation Sickness, plus an extra one for each
full 10 points of Dose.

The sickness normally starts in Health hours after receiving the dose.
Halve the time if the dose was 20+. At 40+, in starts in minutes rather
than hours. At 80+, it starts in rounds.

Every day, make a Health check of 20+ to recover one level of sickness.

##### Haemorrhaging (20+)

Health check to avoid: Dose

Whilst you are suffering from the effects of radiation sickness, you are
also haemorrhaging from the eyes and mouth.

Add +1 fumble chance to any healing checks, or checks to stay alive, for
each level of sickness.

##### Weakness (40+)

Health check to avoid: Half Dose

For the duration of the sickness you also feel weak and exhausted.

Take a -1 penalty to Strength, Agility, and Dexterity.

You also gain a level of Exhaustion and your movement rate is halved.
The Exhaustion does not go away until the sickness is cured.

At a dose of 80+, double the penalties and gain two levels of
Exhaustion.

##### Coma (100+)

Health check to avoid: Tenth Dose

You fall into a coma within Health minutes from which you are unlikely
to recover.

Permanently lose one point of Health every 12 hours. If the dose was
200+, reduce the time to every 8 hours. Every extra 100 points of dose
reduce the time by 2 hours to a minimum of 2 hours.

Every day make a Health check of 20+ to recover. This check is made
after any Health loss.

#### Latent Effects

Latent affects generally kick in days or even weeks after suffering a
high dose of radiation. They are based on the total amount of radiation
received in the last 24 hours.

##### Immune Deficiency (10+)

Health check to avoid: None

Health days after suffering a dose, take a level of Immune Deficiency
sickness for every 10 points of dose. This gives a penalty to healing
checks and for resisting disease or other sicknesses. Each level also
adds +1 fumble chance to all Health checks.

Every week, make a Health check of 20+ to recover one level of this
sickness. On a fumble, you gain one level instead. If you are already at
maximum, then you lose one level of Health permanently.

##### Moderate Effects (40+)

Health check to avoid: Half dose

You suffer hair loss and begin haemorrhaging. You gain a level of
Exhaustion every day (which can be cured by rest) for as long as your
Immune Deficiency sickness lasts.

##### Fatal Effects (100+)

Health check to avoid: None

Beginning Health days after the dose, and every day thereafter, make a
Health check of 20+ or permanently lose one point from each of your
physical attributes.

This stops if you roll a natural '20'. If the dose was 200 or more, it
never stops.

### Chronic Radiation Effects

Radiation received over a longer period of time will tend to have more
subtle effects on your body. If you are receiving less than 3 Radiation
a day then you may be able to avoid the effects of Radiation Sickness.

Every time you accumulate a dose of 10 or more in a 30 day period, make
a Health check at a target of twice the dose received. If you fail, you
start suffering from Radiation Sickness.

Regardless of whether you suffered Radiation Sickness or not, if you
have a current Dose of one or higher, then each year you must roll to
check for any long term effects. Roll a d20 + 1 per 5 Dose.

Roll

Effect

Your Radiation score will drop by one point every year, so a small dose
for a short period may deteriorate before you need to make a check.
However, it won't drop below the 'background' level. If you gained 3
points in the previous year from radiation, then it won't drop below 3.

# Armoury

Those who live by the sword get shot by those that don't.

The variety of ways in which people can kill each other is quite
staggering, and the arms industry seems to do well regardless of the
state of the economy. Whilst YAGS tries to capture some of the flavour
of the various types of death dealing items of equipment, it shouldn't
be seen as a full list of everything that has been available throughout
the modern period.

What YAGS High Tech does try to do is capture a sample of the different
kinds of weapons, and try to model them in a semi-realistic fashion. A
top down approach to realism is what is aimed for - as long as the rules
give the same sort of result as what may be expected in real life, YAGS
doesn't worry too much about the exact way in which this is modelled.

## Explosives

You're only supposed to blow the bloody doors off!"

Though explosives start being used in the West during the medieval
period, they really come into their own during the 19th and 20th
centuries where they are used to level entire cities. Explosives
generally cause damage either through fragmentation or concussive
effects. The difference in game terms is that fragmentation explosives
have a much larger 'kill radius'.

Weapons which cause explosive damage are listed with the property of
Ex-X, where X is the base radius of the explosion.

### Anti-personnel Explosives

Small scale explosives are designed to affect human targets, and are
considered to be less than 500 grammes equivalent of TNT. This is
generally more than enough to kill a human, so most anti-personnel
devices are much smaller than this.

A simple 10 gramme explosive charge of TNT does +20 damage and is
considered a Size 5 attack. Each doubling of the explosive amount does a
further +5 damage. The base radius is equal to one twentieth of the
damage.

Out to the base radius, targets receive the full force of the explosion
and suffer Wounds from the damage.

Out to twice the radius, targets receive Mixed damage.

Out to triple the radius, targets receive Stuns. Vehicles become immune
to the damage at this point, though occupants may still be affected.

Each multiple of the radius beyond this halves the number of stuns
caused. The damage value itself is unaffected, so it still penetrates
armour and soak.

A 10g explosive charge does +20 damage with a radius of 1m. A 20g charge
goes +25 damage, and a 40g charge does +30 damage.

An explosive designed to have a fragmentation effect will have a larger
radius. For a typical modern fragmentation grenade, multiply the blast
radius by 10.

### Anti-vehicle Explosives

The smallest anti-vehicle explosive does Vehicle scale damage of +30,
with a blast radius of 5m and is considered a Size 10 attack. This is
considered to be half a kilogramme of TNT.

Out to the radius of the explosion, the damage type is Major.

Out to twice the radius of the explosion, the damage type is considered
Minor.

Each doubling of the radius beyond this reduces the damage by 100.

Each doubling of the TNT equivalent amount causes +10 damage; each ten
fold increase doubles the radius; each thousand fold increase adds +10
to the Size.

### Avoiding Explosives

Getting into cover is the best defence against explosives. A successful
dodge against an explosive attack allows you to move your combat move
away from the point of impact, hopefully to a less deadly range band.

## Weapons

The number of statistics for each weapon can be quite daunting, but they
are all there for a reason. The least obvious are the codes listed in
the weapon notes. They all have specific meanings which are consistent
across genres and settings. The main purpose is to give a different feel
for different weapons, and to make them useful in different
circumstances.

### Codes

Fully automatic weapon, capable of firing multiple shots or burst fire.
Unless specified, an automatic burst consist of 10 rounds. If a number
is specified, then the burst has this many rounds.

The weapon fires small pellets or flechette rounds, much like a shotgun.
This is poor against armour, but good against soft targets at close
range.

Explosive damage. Does full damage to the target and those within X
metres.

Firearm. Missile weapon firing a high velocity round. Halves all armour
which isn't rated as bullet proof. Quarters most defence rolls (except
full defence).

Heavy weapon. Halves non-heavy bulletproof armour, ignores all weaker
types of armour.

Light weapon. Double the value of heavy or bulletproof armour (overrides
the effects of being a firearm).

Weapon must be reloaded. X is number of rounds to reload. If X is 0,
then a slow attack may also be made that round.

Laser weapon, unaffected by wind, though may suffer in fog and thick
atmospheres. Does not lose accuracy or suffer fumble increase at medium
and long range. Counts as a firearm for defence rolls.

Semi-automatic weapon, can fire multiple shots in a single round but is
not capable of burst fire.

Sonic weapon, ignores all armour but very short ranged. It's base
damage is halved at medium range and quartered at long range (instead of
the normal damage modifiers).

Automatic weapon that can fire automatic bursts of 3 rounds as a single
attack. Counts as a single attack, but any wounds caused are doubled.

Vehicle weapon. Against non-vehicle targets, completely ignores all soak
unless full heavy armour is worn, in which case the soak roll is merely
halved.

## Armour

As weapon technology has progressed, so has that for armour. For much of
the high tech period however, armour has lagged behind since it has been
difficult to make armour effective enough to stop high velocity bullets
which is light enough to be wearable on a modern battlefield.

The first attempts at bulletproof armour where made in the Great War,
but weren't particularly successful. Things improved in World War II,
but attempts were bulky and often impractical.

With the advent of new materials, body armour has improved greatly since
the 2nd half of the 20th century though, and a number of different
options become available in TL7 and TL8.

### Codes

The following codes are used in describing the different types of
armour.

Bulletproof armour is designed to resist firearm attacks, and isn't
halved against weapons rated as 'Fi'. BP armour also has a secondary
effect, which is described below.

Armour rated 'NBC' gives protection against nuclear, biological and
chemical attacks. This generally means that it is a sealed suit, with
either a filtration system or its own air supply.

Armour rated 'Va' is sealed against a vacuum, and the wearer can
operate in space. It has all the benefits of an NBC suit, and always has
its own oxygen supply.

Vehicle scale armour treats the wearer as being a vehicle for purposes
of damage effects.

All armour is considered to be either Heavy or Light. If vehicle armour
is Heavy, then this is generally because it is designed to counter
anti-tank (anti-armour) weapons. This can be very TL dependant, so any
Heavy vehicle weapon treats all armour from a lower TL as being light.

#### Bulletproof Armour

As well as reducing the damage done, bulletproof armour can have a
secondary effect against firearms, reducing the effectiveness of the
attack.

Light BP armour will reduce the damage type by one level (e.g. Wounds to
Mixed) for light and normal attacks, as long as the damage roll was less
than twice the soak roll.

Heavy BP armour will reduce light and normal attacks by two levels, and
heavy attacks by one level, as long as the damage roll was less than
twice the soak roll.

Vehicle scale attacks completely ignore this secondary effect, even
against vehicle scale armour. Any attack which is more than 5 Size
points larger than the target also ignores this.

# 

# The Great Wars (TL6)

This is a war to end all wars.

Only the dead have seen the end of war.

The first half of the 20th century saw some of the most destructive and
far reaching wars humanity has yet been subjected to. They propelled the
USA to the centre stage of world affairs, and began a cold war which was
to dominate the second half of the century.

Technology level 6 is considered to start in 1900, though an equally
valid argument could be made for any date in the few decades immediately
prior to that. If TL 5 saw the rise of industrial machines, so TL 6
comes to be dominated by consumer machines. Horses give way to cars.
Steamboats to planes. Telegrams to telephones. Newspapers to television.
Antibiotics, vaccines, radar and computers are invented in TL 6. It is
the beginning of the modern world.

## Pulp Adventures

In many respects, TL 6 provides the best of both worlds for GMs looking
to set adventures here. Travel to almost anywhere in the world is
relatively easy, and telegrams or even telephones can be used to ask for
aid, or update colleagues back home on what has been going on.

However, society isn't all pervasive. Even if you are out in the
country in England, you'll need to find a house that has a telephone.
Out in the woods, you're on your own. There are still plenty of places
in the world which are relatively unexplored, and which require a lot of
effort to get to.

This is the time of Indiana Jones and similar combat archaeologists.

### Tomb Raiders

This period is great for adventures in exotic locations, finding ancient
treasures and bringing them back to museums. As previously mentioned,
getting to places is much easier than in previous eras, but it is still
hard enough to make it dangerous (and therefore interesting from the
point of view of a game).

International law is still weak enough that adventurers from the First
World can get away with a lot of things they wouldn't be able to in a
more modern period, but again there are far fewer laws to protect you.

The two Wars also provide an easy enemy for PCs to fight against -
especially in the 30s and 40s where the Nazis provide an easily
identifiable bad guy (at least from a modern perspective) for a black
and white morality conflict. The Great War is more complex, and most
players probably don't know as much about this period as they do World
War II, which can either be a benefit or a problem for games set in the
earlier period.

### Horror

This period is ideal for horror games, again because there is just
enough technology to make it interesting. It is also the time of HP
Lovecraft, and his brand of horror fits the period well.

Horror is easy to fit into either of the Wars, and adding a supernatural
theme to the atrocities of either can work well.

### A Post-Apocalypse Setting

The science of this time is advanced, but not that advanced. It is
possible for a small number of people to have a good understanding of
all things that are required for such a culture. This means that
knocking a culture back beyond TL 6 is going to be difficult, unless the
surviving population base is really limited.

The technology of the period is also mechanical, and therefore can be
fiddled with and fixed by a mechanic with a spanner. Many
post-apocalyptic settings are probably going to fall back to TL 6 after
the infrastructure of their technological society is destroyed.

Higher tech equipment will be available, but will gradually decay over
time. Batteries will run out on the ground, and GPS and communication
satellites will eventually stop working.

Knowledge of how to build higher tech items may persist, but there may
be lack of precision tools which prevent them from being made.

### Space Colony Alpha

A small colony on another world may be limited to a few hundred (or
maybe a few thousand) people. Unlike a post-apocalyptic setting where
who survived is going to be pretty random, colonists will have been
chosen for having the right set of useful skills. So though the
population base is smaller, the knowledge to keep things working is more
likely to be there.

Though higher tech goods may be in abundance, the ability to actually
produce new things may be limited to TL 6.

## TL 6 Equipment

Here we provide a list of gear, weapons and vehicles available between
1900 and 1945. WWI saw the development of machine guns and trench
warfare which invented far more effective ways of killing people, and
WWII developed things about as far as you could go without the use of
advanced computers and electronics.

### Gear

Electronics was just becoming available in this period, and was
considerably limited compared to what came later.

modern/tech6/gear.yags

### Melee Weapons

Though guns were the most common form of weapon in this period, people
still used more primitive weapons. Whether it is a gangster bringing a
knife to a gun fight, or a desperate fall back option once you've run
out of bullets, knives and sharp sticks will still be encountered.

A number of the weapons assume that they are made from modern steels
using modern techniques, so may have a higher tech level listed than
more primitive equivalents.

modern/tech6/melee-weapons.yags

### Personal Firearms

Man portable or man-packed weapons, including machine guns, mortars and
early anti-tank weapons covering the period from WWI to WWII.

modern/tech6/smallarms.yags

modern/tech6/heavy-weapons.yags

### Vehicles of the Great War

Despite the mechanisation of killing, the horse and cart was still a
major contributor to transportation during World War I. Iron Clad
battleships, early aircraft and the first tanks were most spectacular
vehicles of the war.

Civilian transportation also began to take off during this period, and
the Ford Model T had been introduced only a few years prior to the start
of the war.

modern/tech6/ww1-vehicles.yags

### Vehicles of World War 2

This is the end of TL 6, and saw the development of many technologies
that would become the basis for TL 7. The late war years are pretty much
on the cusp of TL 6/TL 7, but are considered to be late TL 6 rather than
early TL 7.

modern/tech6/ww2-vehicles.yags

# The Cold War (TL7)

World War II had spurred the development of new technologies that became
the defining achievements of TL7. Computers, electronics, nuclear power
and space flight all become achievable and even in common everyday use,
bringing about some of the greatest changes in technology never before
witnessed.

With the advent of the Cold War, both Russia and America had the
opportunity to engage in an arms race and indirect conflict which caused
no end of suffering, but which provides plenty of opportunity for
gaming.

## Guns

The design of new ways of killing people accelerated, with many
specialisations focussing on particular areas, from police forces and
civilian defence to high tech battle field operations.

modern/tech7/smallarms.yags

modern/tech7/heavy-weapons.yags

## Gear

modern/tech7/gear.yags

## Vehicles

modern/tech7/military-vehicles.yags

# A New Millennium (TL8)

From 1980 to 2020, TL 8 covers the present day. Huge advancements in
computer technology become apparent to the general population over this
period, as communications and information technology begin to reform
society.

Computer assistance makes its way into vehicles and weapons, and
remotely operated drones make the battle field safer (for those who have
the drones). As the threat of full scale nuclear war diminishes, so
small scale tactical weapons are favoured over massive destructive
ability.

## Guns

The reliability and killing power of small arms doesn't change much in
this period, and there is greater focus on making things lighter and
improving personal protection.

modern/tech8/smallarms.yags

## Gear

modern/tech8/gear.yags

## Civilian Vehicles

modern/tech8/civilian-vehicles.yags

## Military Vehicles

modern/tech8/military-vehicles.yags

# Equipment Charts

The following are combined tables containing statistics for all the
weapons previously listed in this article.

## TL6 - The Great Wars

### Small arms

These are small weapons designed to be easily man portable. They range
from pistols up to rifles.

Pistols

Rifles

Shotguns

modern/tech6/smallarms.yags

modern/tech6/heavy-weapons.yags

### Heavy Weapons

These weapons are either normally vehicle mounted, or considered to be
squad support weapons. They are generally not issued to all soldiers,
but to dedicated teams who have been trained in their use.

Heavy

modern/tech6/smallarms.yags

modern/tech6/heavy-weapons.yags

## TL7 - The Atomic Age

### Small arms

These are small weapons designed to be easily man portable. They range
from pistols up to rifles.

Pistols

Rifles

Shotguns

modern/tech7/smallarms.yags

### Heavy Weapons

These weapons are either normally vehicle mounted, or considered to be
squad support weapons. They are generally not issued to all soldiers,
but to dedicated teams who have been trained in their use.

Heavy

modern/tech7/smallarms.yags

modern/tech7/heavy-weapons.yags

## TL8 - The New Millennium

### Small arms

These are small weapons designed to be easily man portable. They range
from pistols up to rifles.

Pistols

Rifles

modern/tech8/smallarms.yags

### Heavy Weapons

These weapons are either normally vehicle mounted, or considered to be
squad support weapons. They are generally not issued to all soldiers,
but to dedicated teams who have been trained in their use.

Heavy

modern/tech8/smallarms.yags
