YAGS 0.7.10

Technology in the Far Future,

Samuel Penn

sam@glendale.org.uk

2018

Samuel Penn

This document can be redistributed and/or modified under the terms of
the GNU Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation
version 2.

# SciFi Tech Equipment

It is change, continuing change, inevitable change, that is the dominant
factor in society today. No sensible decision can be made any longer
without taking into account not only the world as it is, but the world
as it will be.

This is the future of Hollywood Science Fiction. Actually, it's not
quite that bad, but the SciFi label is used to describe a future more
suited to action and adventure amongst interstellar communities, than to
one embedded in a virtual reality simulation running in a Matrioshka
Brain. Laser guns and space ships if you like, rather than hard science
fiction.

YAGS measures the technology available to a campaign with technology
levels (TLs), where the modern era around the start of the 21st
millennium is TL 8. For the technology of the 20th century, see YAGS
High Tech, and other articles will cover earlier periods. TL 9 and above
are in the realms of the future, so is purely fictional.

Everything here is suited to SciFi style campaigns, with faster than
light travel, ridiculous energy production and weird new forms of
matter. It may be suitable for campaigns built around Traveller, Babylon
5 or the Foundation series, though isn't particularly suited to
settings such as those of Revalation Space by Alastair Reynolds or
Queendom of Sol by Wil McCarthy. It's aimed at the harder end of
Hollywood SciFi, rather than the type of futures portrayed in modern SF
books. If you want a harder, grittier future than Ultra Tech will be
designed to cover this, following a branch of future technology where
computational power is not restricted by storytelling requirements.

The big requirement here is that the future is still about people.
Computer technology is limited so that humanity doesn't vanish up its
own singularity, thereby preventing the ability to have high adventure
in interstellar communities.

## Future History

The only way to find the limits of the possible is by going beyond them
to the impossible.

YAGS SciFi generally covers TL 9 through to TL 19, though the higher end
of the scale is getting pretty close to 'magic'. TL 10 is considered a
Kardashev Type I civilisation (utilising all the energy available to a
planet), and TL 20 is considered Kardashev Type II (utilising all the
energy available to a star).

### The Near Future (TL 9)

This covers the technology that becomes available over the rest of the
21st century, from about 2020 to 2100. Computers continue to improve,
genetics and medical science make some great leaps but the biggest
change is in energy storage, which is needed to power the smart devices
of the future.

Guns still fire bullets, mostly with the help of chemical explosions.
Travel to orbit becomes cheaper and easier, but space travel across the
solar system is still hard. Ion drives and nuclear rockets are generally
used.

### The Whole Planet (TL 10)

By TL 10 we can consume the whole energy resources of a planet, with a
combination of fission, fusion, solar and other power sources.
Interplanetary travel becomes easy, but the limits of computational
technology are being approached. By the end of TL 10, the first FTL
drives are developed. Bodily organs can be grown on demand in vats, as
can food.

Guns fire bullets, often propelled by EM gauss effects. Laser weapons
are common in specialist cases. Nuclear powered plasma drives are the
typical means of space travel.

### To The Stars (TL 11)

Star travel becomes reliable as the technology improves, but it is still
slow. Computer technology is approaching a stasis, but medical science
is removing the need for cybernetics, allowing limb re-growth and some
limited anti-agathics.

Gauss and laser weapons tend to be equally common, and materials
technology starts to improve body armour. In space, lasers and particle
beams dominate.

### Fundamental Forces (TL 12)

Star travel becomes faster, and cheaper. Manipulation of the weak force
allows for nuclear damper technology, and new forms of matter can be
created. Medical technology has improved to the point where most things
are survivable if you can get to a hospitable in time. Cybernetics seems
like a passing fad, since organic replacements can be just as good.

Guns can be laser or gauss, but a few heavy plasma weapons are becoming
viable. When large amounts of power is required, anti-matter is the way
to go.

### Walking in the Sky (TL 13)

The creation of repulsors and tractor beams pave the way for flying
cars, though true anti-gravity is still unattainable. Interstellar
travel is cheap and readily available, and much industry is now placed
in orbit.

### Galactic Civilisation (TL 14)

Galactic empires become easily possible at this stage, since
interstellar travel is cheap and fast enough to allow practical
communication over hundreds of light years (travel speed is over
10ly/week).

### Conquering Gravity (TL 15)

Inertial dampers, including artificial gravity.

### Masters of Force (TL 16)

Disintegrators.

# Armoury

The more efficient a reaction drive, the more effective a weapon it
makes.

The number of options available to those who want to kill or harm others
tend to proliferate as technology advances. We have moved from requiring
strength of arm as a measure of killing power, to the equaliser of
chemical powered kinetic and explosive weapons. Experiments with more
exotic ways of killing people, which started in TL 8, finally reach
fruition in TL 9 and beyond.

## Guns and Things

The standard weapon if TL 9+ is the gun, and initially most will be
similar to those that were common in TL 7 and 8.

Laser weapon. Unaffected by wind, though may suffer in fog and thick
atmospheres. Does not loose attack bonus or suffer fumble increases at
medium or long range. Counts as a firearm for defence and damage rolls.

Particle weapon. Similar to lasers, with a few differences which will be
described later.

Plasma weapon. Fires bolts of superheated plasma which burns through a
target explosively. Doesn't count as a firearm against armour, but does
for defence rolls.

Sonic weapon, ignores all armour but very short ranged. It's base
damage is halved at medium range and quartered at long range (instead of
the normal damage modifiers).

Some of the weapon types are described in detail below.

### Exotic Weapon Types

As arms companies search desperately for the next 'killer' weapon
technology, it becomes apparent that one of the most efficient ways of
killing someone is to through a small bit of heavy metal at them very
quickly. This is as true in TL 16 as it was in TL 6.

However, more exotic technologies do have their uses, and after all,
this is meant to be SciFi.

#### Gauss

Gauss weapons do not have a special weapon type, and are considered
identical to standard firearms for combat purposes. They work by
accelerating a charged metal slug with an electromagnetic pulse rather
than by using a chemical explosion.

They can be more accurate than chemical based slug throwers, and in
theory can have higher muzzle velocities once power densities of the
weapon's battery reaches a suitable point, but are otherwise similar to
previous weapon designs.

#### Lasers

Laser weapons are generally the first departure away from propelling a
slug of metal towards the target. As a 'direct-energy' weapon, a laser
directly converts energy into killing power. Though this isn't as
efficient as it may sound, laser beams have definite advantages.

Lasers are very accurate. On the scale most gun fights are fought,
lasers are unaffected by wind and gravity. They do not lose their attack
bonus at medium and long range, and neither do they suffer increased
fumble chance. Laser weapons also tend to have a very high increment
attribute.

The medium and long will be double and triple the short range of the
weapon. The beam does not stop at long range however, and will continue
beyond this. Each multiple of short range beyond long doubles the damage
penalty however. So damage is at -5 at medium range, -10 at long range,
-20 up to x4 short, -40 up to x5 short etc.

Lasers also have the ability to shoot through standard glass without
affecting either the beam or the glass. However, they are affected by
moisture, and ranges are at least halved in mist or fog, and quartered
in heavy rain. Reduce range by a factor of 10 underwater.

In a thin atmosphere, double all ranges, and in a vacuum triple short
range.

#### Particle Beams

Particle Beam weapons are treated similar to Lasers with a few
differences. They cannot shoot through glass, but are also unaffected by
fog and rain. However, they are blocked by water.

They tend to have shorter ranges than lasers.

#### Plasma

Plasma weapons fire a bolt of superheated plasma. They tend to have
relatively short range, since they lose energy to the atmosphere quite
readily. They explode on impact, causing nasty flesh burns, but lack
penetrating power.

This actually makes them quite well suited for combat within a
spaceship, since they are unlikely to cause a hull breach.

Plasma weapons cause a Stun for every Wound that they do, but are
generally considered light weapons, so do limited damage against someone
in armour.

# TL9: The Near Future

The future has already arrived. It's just not evenly distributed yet.

The progression of technology through the 21st century has been one of
iterative improvements over what has gone before. There's little which
is completely unexpected, though changes to society would not have been
expected in early TL 8.

## A TL 9 Culture

Everybody is part of the network, and everything is in the cloud. Social
networks link everybody to everyone else, and your reputation and
friends are governed by your standing on these social networks. Privacy
crumbles under the onslaught of location based services, advertising and
automated status updates. As new generations are born into this world,
and find the idea of sharing your life, thoughts and loves with
everybody else perfectly natural, keeping a lid on commentary becomes
impossible.

Part of this new world is aided by the invention of superior new energy
storage technologies, so even the most power hungry smart phones can
last a week between recharges. Consistency between power sockets and
network links also becomes necessary, and possible once requirements
begin to stabilise.

On a larger scale, there is a greater use of energy sources such as
solar, wind and tidal power as a more flexible and distributed power
grid is developed. Fossil fuels are still heavily used, though high
performance electric cars begin to become practical with better
batteries. Towards the end of TL 9, fusion power starts to come online,
though most power stations are proof of concept designs serving small
towns.

In space, new forms of drive technology based around plasma and ion
designs come into use. There is limited colonisation of the solar
system, and industrial, medical and tourist use of orbital facilities.

Genetic engineering becomes the norm on a large scale, greatly improving
the availability of food. Genetic disorders can be cured prior to birth
and for the wealthy life expectancy rises consistently above 100.
Cybernetics improves, with lost limbs and other organs being replaced by
artificial devices as good as, if not better than, the original thing.

## Weapons

The killing ability of man portable weapons plateaus during late TL8 and
early TL9. The lack of progress in personal armour means there isn't a
necessity for weapons to become more deadly. Instead, they are lighter,
more reliable and somewhat cleverer.

Most small arms switch to case-less ammunition, with some larger rifles
moving to gauss or even laser. For the most part, the good old chemical
powered slug thrower is still the most efficient in terms of weight,
cost and effectiveness.

Armour becomes a bit lighter and a bit more effective, but not by much.
Richer nations can afford powered hard shell armour towards the end of
TL9, but since they're also the ones making the newer weapons and
they're only going up against lightly armoured opponents there isn't a
drive to modify small arms to be effective against such targets.

Smart weapons, capable of automatically calculating the range to a
target, and setting explosive timers themselves do become common.
Networked battlefields, combining light artillery, drones and
net-enabled combat troopers can bring effective fire down on an enemy
position quickly and technically without human intervention.

scifi/tech09/smallarms.yags

scifi/tech09/heavy-weapons.yags

## Gear

There are plenty of gadgets available in TL 9 to make a person's life
easier (or, in some cases, longer). Most of the items available at TL 8
are also available at TL 9, though they are quicker and have better
battery life.

For electronic gadgets, power has been the limiting factor for many
years. It is assumed that better standards are in place, with most
devices supporting wireless power (either on a power mat, or
over-the-air wireless transmitters). Many small devices allow trickle
charge through renewable means, such as solar power, body heat or
kinetics.

scifi/tech09/gear.yags

## Cybernetics

Good quality prosthetics started to become available in TL8, but it is
in TL9 where they really begin to exceed typical human ability. Such
enhancements begin to be taken up by first the military, and then
civilians involved in extreme activities, such as certain sports.

scifi/tech09/cybernetic.yags

# TL10: The Whole Planet

Once a person has all the things they need to live, everything else is
entertainment.

Some time in TL 10, civilisation becomes Type I on the Kardashev Scale,
achieving mastery of the resources of its home planet. Energy production
and consumption is considerably beyond what was available in TL 8, and
continues to grow beyond expectations.

## A TL 10 Culture

By TL 10 cities are smart. Automated surveillance is everywhere,
monitoring where people are and what they are doing. This flow of
information allows for a degree of efficiency not seen before, but also
limits the privacy available to everyone. Many people record their whole
lives, video and audio captured though implants inserted soon after
birth. The legal ramifications are massive, and there's either a crack
down on such technology or an opening up of restrictions on what can be
recorded (and played back for public consumption).

Fusion power is the most common form of large scale power generation,
but power is reclaimed via other means on a smaller scale. Solar, tidal
and wind power grabs what it can and feeds it into national energy grids
in a greatly distributed system of power generation. Highly efficient
energy storage systems can store power locally, minimising the effects
of national failures, and reducing the need to crank up large scale
generation during short term spikes in demand.

Everybody is connected, and access to information is pretty global.
Wireless communication connects most devices - long range for access to
news and information, short range for eCash transfers. The technology is
there to support automatic micro-transactions for most services, which
could replace some forms of taxation if the will is there.

As well as smart devices, there is smart textiles which can change
colour and texture based on environment and body state. Smart composites
make for good body armour which can switch from flexible to stiff as a
bullet tries to penetrate. For that matter, smart bullets which can
control their trajectory and behaviour depending on the type of target
they've hit are also available.

Replacement organs can be grown in vats, genetically programmed to match
the host recipient within hours of being implanted. Regrowth of limbs is
possible, though expensive, and for a price pretty much any disease can
be cured. Drugs and nano machines for physical enhancement also exist.

In space, efficient and fast drive systems allow trade between worlds
within a star system, and orbital and planetary colonies are common.
Towards the latter part of the TL, the first Jump drives are
constructed, allowing travel to distant stars.

## Weapons

The biggest shift in weapons technologies comes not from weapons, but
from armour. Flexible but strong armour which can react to absorb and
dissipate damage becomes possible and common. This in turn requires more
powerful small arms to keep infantry effective.

Larger calibre chemical slug throwers are still used in pistols and
assault rifles, but gauss and laser weapons become the norm in larger
rifles. Battle rifles come equipped with smart ammunition.

# 
